


Begin of sorted by alphabet text:


ACT 5
ACT 3
ACT 4
ACT 2
ALL Armed, my lord.
ALL Gentlemen!
ALL My lord, from head to foot.
ALL No, let’s come in!
ALL Our duty to your Honor.
ALL Treason, treason!
ALL We do, my lord.
ALL We will, we will.
AMBASSADOR The sight is dismal,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up—
A bloody deed—almost as bad, good mother,
About her lank and all o’erteemèd loins
About, my brains!—Hum, I have heard
About the world have times twelve thirties been
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
A brother’s murder. Pray can I not,
Absent thee from felicity awhile
Abuses me to damn me. I’ll have grounds
According to the phrase or the addition
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
A combination and a form indeed
A couch for luxury and damnèd incest.
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
Acts little of his will.—Tell me, Laertes,
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Addicted so and so.” And there put on him
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.He exits.
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
A double blessing is a double grace.
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
A face without a heart?
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl

Affront Ophelia.
A flourish for the Players.
A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
After the thing it loves.
Against the which a moiety competent
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
Alack and fie for shame,
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
A little more than kin and less than kind.
All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.
All but Hamlet exit.
All but Hamlet exit.
All but Hamlet exit.
All but the King exit.
All flaxen was his poll.
All from her father’s death, and now behold!
All given to mine ear.
All in the morning betime,
All may be well.He kneels.
All my smooth body.
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
A man that Fortune’s buffets and rewards
A march afar off and shot within.
A minist’ring angel shall my sister be
Among a mineral of metals base,
A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.
An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope.
And England, if my love thou hold’st at aught
And I a maid at your window,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
And I’ll be placed, so please you, in the ear
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
And I the matter will reword, which madness
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
And, after, we will both our judgments join
And all we mourn for.
And a man’s life’s no more than to say “one.”
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
And a most instant tetter barked about,
And, as I think, they have already order
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th’ alarm,
And, as the world were now but to begin,
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
And, at our more considered time, we’ll read,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
And bear it to the chapel.
And be not from his reason fall’n thereon,
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
And blow them at the moon. O, ’tis most sweet
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
And both neglect. What if this cursèd hand
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
And break your own neck down.
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
And, but that great command o’ersways the order,
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep—
And call it accident.
And call the noblest to the audience.
And can say nothing—no, not for a king
And can you by no drift of conference
And carriage of the article designed,
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
And could of men distinguish, her election
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
And do such bitter business as the day
And do ’t the speedier that you may direct me
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
And drive his purpose into these delights.
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
And dupped the chamber door,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
And either … the devil or throw him out
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
And even the like precurse of feared events,
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
And foreign mart for implements of war,
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
And for my means, I’ll husband them so well
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
And for that purpose I’ll anoint my sword.
And for the day confined to fast in fires
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
And for your rapier most especial,

And from her fair and unpolluted flesh

And from his mother’s closet hath he dragged him.
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
And gave you such a masterly report
And gem of all the nation.
And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
And hath abatements and delays as many
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
And hath shipped me into the land,
And hears it roar beneath.
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
And he to England shall along with you.
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
And his sandal shoon.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
And how, and who, what means, and where they
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
And hurt my brother.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
And in a postscript here, he says “alone.”
And in his grave rained many a tear.
And, in part, him.” Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
“And, in part, him, but,” you may say, “not well.
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
And in the porches of my ears did pour
And in this brainish apprehension kills
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
And it must follow, as the night the day,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
And let him know so.
And let me speak to th’ yet unknowing world
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
And let them know both what we mean to do
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
And let us once again assail your ears,
And, like a man to double business bound,
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
And, like the kind life-rend’ring pelican,
And live the purer with the other half!
And lose the name of action.—Soft you now,
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
And makes each petty arture in this body
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
And more above, hath his solicitings,
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,



And my imaginations are as foul
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
And never come mischance between us twain.
And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall
And not have strewed thy grave.

And nothing is at a like goodness still;
And now I’ll do ’t.He draws his sword.
And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you?
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
And of all Christians’ souls, I pray God. God be wi’
And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself
And our affairs from England come too late.
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
And passion in the gods.
And pious action we do sugar o’er
And pity ’tis ’tis true—a foolish figure,
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
And prey on garbage.
And prologue to the omen coming on,
And put it in his pocket—
And reason panders will.
And recks not his own rede.
And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
And set a double varnish on the fame
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
And so have I a noble father lost,
And so he goes to heaven,
And so, without more circumstance at all,
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
And stand a comma ’tween their amities,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
And sure I am two men there is not living
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
And tell you what I know.
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine—
And that I see, in passages of proof,
And that he calls for drink, I’ll have prepared
And that his soul may be as damned and black
And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
And that our drift look through our bad
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
And the King’s rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
And then it started like a guilty thing
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
And then this “should” is like a spendthrift sigh,
And there I see such black and grainèd spots
And there assume some other horrible form
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
And these few precepts in thy memory
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
And they in France of the best rank and station
And they shall hear and judge ’twixt you and me.
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
And thou must cure me. Till I know ’tis done,
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
And thus o’ersizèd with coagulate gore,
And thus the native hue of resolution
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.—
And thy commandment all alone shall live
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
And to the last bended their light on me.
And to the manner born, it is a custom
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
And vanished from our sight.
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
And we cast away moan.
And we did think it writ down in our duty
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?—
And what’s in prayer but this twofold force,
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
And what’s untimely done. …
And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
And where th’ offense is, let the great ax fall.
And, where ’tis so, th’ offender’s scourge is weighed,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And will he not come again?
And will he not come again?
And will not let belief take hold of him
And will not wrong it.
And will this brothers’ wager frankly play.—
And with a larger tether may he walk
And with a look so piteous in purport
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow,
And with no less nobility of love
And with such cozenage—is ’t not perfect
And with such maimèd rites? This doth betoken
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
And with th’ incorporal air do hold discourse?
And women’s fear and love hold quantity,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.
And yet it is almost against my conscience.
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
An earnest conjuration from the King,
An eye like Mars’ to threaten and command,
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
A noise within: “Let her come in!”
A noise within.
A noise within.
Anon, as patient as the female dove
Answer, and think upon this business.
An thou hadst not come to my bed.”
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
An understanding simple and unschooled.
A pickax and a spade, a spade,
Appears before them and with solemn march
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
Are joyfully returned.
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
A rhapsody of words! Heaven’s face does glow
Armed at point exactly, cap-à-pie,
Armed, say you?
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
Arousèd vengeance sets him new a-work,
A royal knavery—an exact command,
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
As England was his faithful tributary,
As I do live, my honored lord, ’tis true.
As I do thee.—Something too much of this.—
(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note,
As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could an if we
A sable silvered.
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
As are companions noted and most known
A savageness in unreclaimèd blood,
As by lot, God wot
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
As day does to your eye.
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
A second time I kill my husband dead
As e’er my conversation coped withal.
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
As false as dicers’ oaths—O, such a deed
As fits a king’s remembrance.
As from the body of contraction plucks
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
As harbingers preceding still the fates
As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.
As he in his particular act and place
As he is very potent with such spirits,
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Aside. They fool me to the top of my bent.—I will
Aside. To my sick soul (as sin’s true nature is),
As if I had never been such.
As if he had been loosèd out of hell
As if increase of appetite had grown
As if it some impartment did desire
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
As infinite as man may undergo,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,

A sister driven into desp’rate terms,

As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
(As it doth well appear unto our state)
As it hath used to do, that I have found
As it is common for the younger sort
As kill a king?
As kill a king and marry with his brother.
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
As level as the cannon to his blank
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As low as to the fiends!
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
(As make your bouts more violent to that end)
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
As of a father; for let the world take note,
As of a man faithful and honorable.
As oft as any passions under heaven
As one incapable of her own distress
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
A stallion! Fie upon ’t! Foh!
A station like the herald Mercury
As the indifferent children of the earth.
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
As therein are set down.
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
As thus: “I know his father and his friends
As to expend your time with us awhile
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
As to peace-parted souls.
As ’twere a thing a little soiled i’ th’ working,
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
As will not leave their tinct.
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
At “closes in the consequence”—ay, marry—
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
At his head a grass-green turf,
At his heels a stone.
(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
A touch, a touch. I do confess ’t.
A truant disposition, good my lord.
At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him.
Attends the boist’rous ruin. Never alone
A very ribbon in the cap of youth—
A very very—pajock.
A villain kills my father, and for that,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
Away, for everything is sealed and done
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
Ay, “fashion” you may call it. Go to, go to!
Ay, madam, it is common.
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO I have seen nothing.
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO Last night of all,
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO/MARCELLUS Longer, longer.
BARNARDO Say, what, is Horatio there?
BARNARDO See, it stalks away.
BARNARDO Sit down awhile,
BARNARDO ’Tis here.
BARNARDO 
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
Be all my sins remembered.
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Bear ’t that th’ opposèd may beware of thee.
Be as ourself in Denmark.—Madam, come.
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Been struck so to the soul that presently
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Before mine uncle. I’ll observe his looks;
Before my God, I might not this believe
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Behind the arras I’ll convey myself
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
Being nature’s livery or fortune’s star,
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Believe so much in him that he is young,
Be ruled. You shall not go.
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Bestow this place on us a little while.
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Between the pass and fell incensèd points
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Both countenance and excuse.—Ho, Guildenstern!
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
Bring him before us.
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
But I do prophesy th’ election lights
But I have that within which passes show,
But I will delve one yard below their mines
But age with his stealing steps
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
But as we often see against some storm
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
But, better looked into, he truly found
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
But do not go with it.
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
But even then the morning cock crew loud,


But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
But farewell it, for I will use no art.

But from what cause he will by no means speak.
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
But he’s an arrant knave.
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
But if ’t be he I mean, he’s very wild,
But if the gods themselves did see her then
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
But in our circumstance and course of thought
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
But it reserved some quantity of choice
But keep a farm and carters.
But let it be.—Horatio, I am dead.
But let me hear from you.
But let that go.
But let this same be presently performed
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
But mad in craft. ’Twere good you let him know,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
But never doubt I love.
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
But not by him.
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
But not where I have aimed them.
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son—
But, orderly to end where I begun:
But our cold maids do “dead men’s fingers” call
But pardon ’t as you are a gentleman. This presence
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
But that I know love is begun by time
But that the dread of something after death,
But that this folly drowns it.He exits.
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
But this eternal blazon must not be
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
But to confront the visage of offense?
But, to my mind, though I am native here
But to recover of us, by strong hand
But truly I do fear it.
But two months dead—nay, not so much, not two.
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
But what we do determine oft we break.
But who, ah woe, had seen the moblèd queen—
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof

But with much forcing of his disposition.

But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
But yet to me they’re strong. The Queen his mother
But you’ll be secret?
But you must know your father lost a father,
Buys out the law. But ’tis not so above:
By Cock, they are to blame.
By desperate appliance are relieved
By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
By his cockle hat and staff
By indirections find directions out.
By laborsome petition, and at last
By letters congruing to that effect,
By their oppressed and fear-surprisèd eyes
By the o’ergrowth of some complexion
By this encompassment and drift of question
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
CAPTAIN Against some part of Poland.
CAPTAIN God be wi’ you, sir.He exits.
CAPTAIN I will do ’t, my lord.
CAPTAIN 
CAPTAIN They are of Norway, sir.
CAPTAIN 
CAPTAIN 
CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND 
“Call him a-down-a.”—O, how the wheel becomes
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
Can serve my turn? “Forgive me my foul murder”?
Can you advise me?
Capitol. Brutus killed me.
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
Christian burial.
Christian burial.
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
Clamb’ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
Claudius rises.
Colleaguèd with this dream of his advantage,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Come, Gertrude, we’ll call up our wisest friends
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
Come.
Come. They play. Another hit. What say you?
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Come, for England.He exits.
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
Come hither, gentlemen,
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Comes armèd through our watch so like the king
Come short of what he did.
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.—
Come, some music!
Compounded it with dust, whereto ’tis kin.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
Conjures the wand’ring stars and makes them stand
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
Consent to swear.
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Cornelius.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
Couch we awhile and mark.They step aside.
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Could not with all their quantity of love
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Cries “cuckold” to my father, brands the harlot
Cry to be heard, as ’twere from heaven to earth,
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
DOCTOR 
DOCTOR No more be done.
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
Delay it not. I’ll have him hence tonight.
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
Denmark?
Denmark.
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
Deprived thee of!—Hold off the earth awhile,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair—
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep—
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Did nothing.
Did not together pluck such envy from him
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
Did you not speak to it?


Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw

Directly seasons him his enemy.
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
Does by their own insinuation grow.
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon—
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Do not forever with thy vailèd lids
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
Do not, my lord.
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
Dost know this waterfly?
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus’ pause,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Doubt that the sun doth move,
Doubt thou the stars are fire,
Doubt truth to be a liar,
Do you believe his “tenders,” as you call them?
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.
Drum, trumpets, and shot.
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Elsinore?
England.
Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.
Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Enter Ghost.
Enter Ghost.
Enter Ghost.
Enter Ghost.
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.
Enter Gravedigger and Another.

Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.

Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.
Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.
Enter Hamlet reading on a book.
Enter Horatio.
Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
Enter Horatio and others.
Enter King.
Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
Enter King and Laertes.
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
Enter King and two or three.
Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.
Enter Laertes with others.
Enter Lucianus.
Enter Ophelia.
Enter Ophelia.
Enter Ophelia distracted.
Enter Osric.
Enter Osric, a courtier.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Prologue.
Enter Queen.
Enter Queen and Polonius.
Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.
Enter Rosencrantz.
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Enter Sailors.
Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
Enter a Lord.
Enter a Messenger.
Enter a Messenger with letters.
Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.
Enter the Player King and Queen.
Enter the Players.
Enter the Players with recorders.
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Even here between the chaste unsmirchèd brow
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
Even while men’s minds are wild, lest more
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
FIRST PLAYER Anon he finds him
FIRST PLAYER Ay, my lord.
FIRST PLAYER Ay, my lord.
FIRST PLAYER 
FIRST PLAYER 
FIRST PLAYER What speech, my good lord?
FORTINBRAS 
FORTINBRAS Go softly on.All but the Captain exit.
FORTINBRAS Let four captains
FORTINBRAS Let us haste to hear it
FORTINBRAS 


FORTINBRAS Where is this sight?
FRANCISCO 

FRANCISCO Give you good night.
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
Fall’n on th’ inventors’ heads. All this can I
Fall ten times treble on that cursèd head
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
Farewell.Reynaldo exits.
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
Farewell, dear mother.
Fare you well, my dove.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Fie on ’t, ah fie! ’Tis an unweeded garden
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.
Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
Folded the writ up in the form of th’ other,
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Follow my mother.King dies.
For England.
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
For Hecuba!
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
For and a shrouding sheet,
For art and exercise in your defense,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
For by the image of my cause I see
Forcing him to drink the poison.
Fordo its own life. ’Twas of some estate.
(For every man hath business and desire,
For food and diet to some enterprise
For good Polonius’ death, and we have done but
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
For he himself is subject to his birth.
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
For he was likely, had he been put on,
For husband shalt thou—
For if the King like not the comedy,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
For out o’ doors he went without their helps
For some must watch, while some must sleep:
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
For such a guest is meet.
For such a guest is meet.
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
For the supply and profit of our hope,
For they are actions that a man might play;
For this effect defective comes by cause.
For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
Fortinbras.
For ’tis a question left us yet to prove
For ’tis the sport to have the enginer
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?
For us and for our tragedy,
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
For what advancement may I hope from thee
For what we know must be and is as common
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
For who that’s but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
For women fear too much, even as they love,
For your desire to know what is between us,
Francisco exits.
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
From another one?
From fashion of himself. What think you on ’t?
From me, whose love was of that dignity
From our achievements, though performed at
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
From the first corse till he that died today,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round
GENTLEMAN Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
GENTLEMAN She is importunate,
GENTLEMAN 
GENTLEMEN, within Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
GHOST 
GHOST Do not forget. This visitation
GHOST I am thy father’s spirit,
GHOST I find thee apt;
GHOST 
GHOST 
GHOST My hour is almost come
GHOST 
GHOST 
GHOST 
GHOST, beneath Swear.
GHOST, beneath Swear.
GHOST, beneath Swear by his sword.
GHOST cries under the stage Swear.
GRAVEDIGGER A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
GRAVEDIGGER A whoreson mad fellow’s it was.
GRAVEDIGGER Ay, marry, is ’t—crowner’s ’quest law.
GRAVEDIGGER Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
GRAVEDIGGER Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
GRAVEDIGGER Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
GRAVEDIGGER E’en that.
GRAVEDIGGER Faith, e’en with losing his wits.
GRAVEDIGGER Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
GRAVEDIGGER For no man, sir.
GRAVEDIGGER For none, neither.
GRAVEDIGGER Give me leave. Here lies the water;
GRAVEDIGGER He was the first that ever bore arms.
GRAVEDIGGER How can that be, unless she drowned
GRAVEDIGGER I like thy wit well, in good faith. The

GRAVEDIGGER Is she to be buried in Christian burial,

GRAVEDIGGER It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
GRAVEDIGGER Mine, sir.
GRAVEDIGGER Of all the days i’ th’ year, I came to ’t
GRAVEDIGGER One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
GRAVEDIGGER ’Tis a quick lie, sir; ’twill away again
GRAVEDIGGER To ’t.
GRAVEDIGGER ’Twill not be seen in him there. There
GRAVEDIGGER Very strangely, they say.
GRAVEDIGGER What, art a heathen? How dost thou
GRAVEDIGGER What is he that builds stronger than
GRAVEDIGGER Why, because he was mad. He shall
GRAVEDIGGER Why, here in Denmark. I have been
GRAVEDIGGER Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
GRAVEDIGGER Why, there thou sayst. And the more
GRAVEDIGGER You lie out on ’t, sir, and therefore ’tis
GRAVEDIGGER sings 
GRAVEDIGGER sings 
GUILDENSTERN A “thing,” my lord?
GUILDENSTERN Believe me, I cannot.
GUILDENSTERN But these cannot I command to any
GUILDENSTERN But we both obey,
GUILDENSTERN 
GUILDENSTERN Faith, her privates we.
GUILDENSTERN Good my lord, put your discourse into
GUILDENSTERN Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
GUILDENSTERN 
GUILDENSTERN 
GUILDENSTERN I know no touch of it, my lord.
GUILDENSTERN In what, my dear lord?
GUILDENSTERN Is in his retirement marvelous
GUILDENSTERN My honored lord.
GUILDENSTERN My lord, I cannot.
GUILDENSTERN My lord, we were sent for.
GUILDENSTERN Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
GUILDENSTERN No, my lord, with choler.
GUILDENSTERN 
GUILDENSTERN O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
GUILDENSTERN O, there has been much throwing
GUILDENSTERN Prison, my lord?
GUILDENSTERN The King, sir—
GUILDENSTERN The Queen your mother, in most great
GUILDENSTERN There are the players.
GUILDENSTERN We will ourselves provide.
GUILDENSTERN What should we say, my lord?
GUILDENSTERN Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have
Gertrude.—
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Get you a place.
Ghost and Hamlet exit.
Ghost beckons.
Ghost exits.
Ghost exits.
Ghost exits.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Give first admittance to th’ ambassadors.
Give him the cup.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
Give me my father!
Give me one poor request.
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I’ll ha ’t.
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
Gives me superfluous death.
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
Give us the foils. Come on.
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Giving them a paper.
Giving to you no further personal power
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
God ’a mercy on his soul.
God bless you, sir.
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Gonzago is the duke’s name, his wife Baptista. You
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.—
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
Good my lord, tell it.
Good night. But go not to my uncle’s bed.
Good night, mother.
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
“Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,”
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Go to thy deathbed.
Go to your rest. At night we’ll feast together.
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
Guildenstern.
Guildenstern and Attendants.
Guildenstern, and Lords.
HAMLET 
HAMLET A dream itself is but a shadow.
HAMLET A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
HAMLET Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
HAMLET A king of shreds and patches—
HAMLET Alas, poor ghost!
HAMLET Am I not i’ th’ right, old Jephthah?
HAMLET A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
HAMLET A murderer and a villain,


HAMLET And do still, by these pickers and stealers.
HAMLET And fixed his eyes upon you?
HAMLET And smelt so? Pah!He puts the skull down.

HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET Anything but to th’ purpose. You were sent
HAMLET Are you fair?
HAMLET 
HAMLET As thou ’rt a man,
HAMLET As woman’s love.
HAMLET At supper.
HAMLET A whole one, I.
HAMLET Ay, lady, it was my word.
HAMLET 
HAMLET Ay, marry, is ’t,
HAMLET Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
HAMLET Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
HAMLET Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
HAMLET Ay, sir, but “While the grass grows”—the
HAMLET Ay, sir, that soaks up the King’s countenance,
HAMLET Ay, sir, what of him?
HAMLET 
HAMLET Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
HAMLET Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
HAMLET 
HAMLET Be not too tame neither, but let your own
HAMLET Between who?
HAMLET Bid the players make haste.Polonius exits.
HAMLET But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
HAMLET But where was this?
HAMLET But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
HAMLET Buzz, buzz.
HAMLET “By and by” is easily said. Leave me,
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET Come on, sir.
HAMLET 
HAMLET Denmark’s a prison.
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET Do not believe it.
HAMLET Dost thou think Alexander looked o’ this
HAMLET Do the boys carry it away?
HAMLET Do they hold the same estimation they did
HAMLET 
HAMLET Do you see nothing there?
HAMLET Do you see yonder cloud that’s almost in
HAMLET Do you think I meant country matters?
HAMLET Ecstasy?
HAMLET Excellent, i’ faith, of the chameleon’s dish. I
HAMLET Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
HAMLET Follow him, friends. We’ll hear a play
HAMLET For England?
HAMLET For God’s love, let me hear!
HAMLET For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
HAMLET From top to toe?
HAMLET Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
HAMLET Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
HAMLET God’s bodykins, man, much better! Use every
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET Good.
HAMLET Good madam.
HAMLET Good sir, whose powers are these?
HAMLET Ha, ha, are you honest?
HAMLET 
HAMLET Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too—at
HAMLET 
HAMLET Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
HAMLET Hear you, sir,
HAMLET 
HAMLET He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
HAMLET He poisons him i’ th’ garden for his estate. His
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET He that plays the king shall be welcome—his
HAMLET 
HAMLET He will stay till you come.Attendants exit.
HAMLET 
HAMLET Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!
HAMLET His beard was grizzled, no?
HAMLET Hold off your hands.
HAMLET 
HAMLET How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
HAMLET How came he mad?
HAMLET How chances it they travel? Their residence,
HAMLET How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
HAMLET 
HAMLET How if I answer no?
HAMLET How is it with you, lady?
HAMLET How long is that since?
HAMLET How long will a man lie i’ th’ earth ere he rot?
HAMLET 
HAMLET How purposed, sir, I pray you?

HAMLET 

HAMLET How “strangely”?
HAMLET I am but mad north-north-west. When the
HAMLET I am constant to my purposes. They follow
HAMLET I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
HAMLET I am glad to see you well.
HAMLET 
HAMLET I am tame, sir. Pronounce.
HAMLET 
HAMLET I beseech you, remember. He motions to
HAMLET I could interpret between you and your love,
HAMLET I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
HAMLET 
HAMLET I do beseech you.
HAMLET I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
HAMLET I do not well understand that. Will you play
HAMLET I embrace it freely
HAMLET 
HAMLET If she should break it now!
HAMLET If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague
HAMLET I have heard of your paintings too, well
HAMLET I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
HAMLET I humbly thank you, sir. Aside to Horatio.
HAMLET I humbly thank you, well.
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET I mean, my head upon your lap?
HAMLET 
HAMLET Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
HAMLET Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
HAMLET In happy time.
HAMLET In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
HAMLET In my mind’s eye, Horatio.
HAMLET In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
HAMLET Into my grave?
HAMLET I pray you.
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
HAMLET Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?
HAMLET Is ’t possible?
HAMLET I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in ’t.
HAMLET It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
HAMLET It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
HAMLET It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
HAMLET It shall to the barber’s with your beard.—
HAMLET It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
HAMLET I will.
HAMLET I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
HAMLET I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
HAMLET I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
HAMLET I will watch tonight.


HAMLET I would I had been there.
HAMLET 
HAMLET I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it

HAMLET Judgment!
HAMLET Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
HAMLET Let her not walk i’ th’ sun. Conception is a
HAMLET Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
HAMLET 
HAMLET Madam, how like you this play?
HAMLET Make you a wholesome answer. My wit’s
HAMLET Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
HAMLET Methinks it is like a weasel.
HAMLET 
HAMLET Murder?
HAMLET My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
HAMLET My fate cries out
HAMLET My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
HAMLET 
HAMLET Nay, I know not.
HAMLET Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
HAMLET Nay, but swear ’t.
HAMLET Nay, but to live
HAMLET Nay, come again.
HAMLET Nay, do not think I flatter,
HAMLET Nay, that follows not.
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET No, believe me, ’tis very cold; the wind is
HAMLET No, by the rood, not so.
HAMLET No, by this hand.
HAMLET No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
HAMLET No, good mother. Here’s metal more
HAMLET No, nor mine now. To Polonius. My lord, you
HAMLET 
HAMLET No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
HAMLET Nor did you nothing hear?
HAMLET Nor the soles of her shoe?
HAMLET No such matter. I will not sort you with the
HAMLET Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
HAMLET Nothing.
HAMLET Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
HAMLET 
HAMLET Now, mother, what’s the matter?
HAMLET No, you will reveal it.
HAMLET O God!
HAMLET O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
HAMLET O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
HAMLET O, I die, Horatio!
HAMLET O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure

HAMLET 

HAMLET O, but she’ll keep her word.
HAMLET Of him, sir.
HAMLET Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
HAMLET O good Horatio, I’ll take the ghost’s word for
HAMLET O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!
HAMLET One.
HAMLET 
HAMLET O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
HAMLET Or like a whale.
HAMLET Or of a courtier, which could say “Good
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET O, wonderful!
HAMLET O wonderful son that can so ’stonish a mother!
HAMLET Pale or red?
HAMLET 
HAMLET Safely stowed.
HAMLET Saw who?
HAMLET 
HAMLET She well instructs me.Lord exits.
HAMLET Sir, I cannot.
HAMLET Sir, I lack advancement.
HAMLET Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
HAMLET Sir, a whole history.
HAMLET Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
HAMLET 
HAMLET 

HAMLET Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
HAMLET So be it.

HAMLET So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
HAMLET 
HAMLET So you mis-take your husbands.—Begin,
HAMLET Speak. I am bound to hear.
HAMLET Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
HAMLET Such an act
HAMLET ’Swounds, show me what thou ’t do.
HAMLET That I can keep your counsel and not mine
HAMLET That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
HAMLET That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.
HAMLET That’s a fair thought to lie between maids’
HAMLET That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
HAMLET That’s two of his weapons. But, well—
HAMLET That’s wormwood!
HAMLET That you must teach me. But let me conjure
HAMLET 
HAMLET The King my father?
HAMLET “The Mousetrap.” Marry, how? Tropically.
HAMLET 
HAMLET The body is with the King, but the King is not
HAMLET The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
HAMLET “The moblèd queen”?
HAMLET Then I will come to my mother by and by.
HAMLET Then I would you were so honest a man.
HAMLET Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
HAMLET Then came each actor on his ass.
HAMLET Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
HAMLET Then saw you not his face?
HAMLET Then you live about her waist, or in the
HAMLET The phrase would be more germane to the
HAMLET 
HAMLET There’s another. Why may not that be the
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
HAMLET They are sheep and calves which seek out
HAMLET This?
HAMLET 
HAMLET Thou dost lie in ’t, to be in ’t and say it is thine.
HAMLET Thou pray’st not well.They grapple.
HAMLET 
HAMLET ’Tis e’en so. The hand of little employment
HAMLET ’Tis very strange.
HAMLET ’Tis well. I’ll have thee speak out the rest of
HAMLET 
HAMLET To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
HAMLET To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
HAMLET 
HAMLET Up from my cabin,
HAMLET 
HAMLET Upon the talk of the poisoning?
HAMLET Upon what ground?
HAMLET Very like. Stayed it long?
HAMLET Very well. Follow that lord—and look you
HAMLET Very well, my lord.
HAMLET Well, God-a-mercy.
HAMLET We’ll ha ’t tomorrow night. You could, for a
HAMLET 
HAMLET We shall know by this fellow. The players
HAMLET We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
HAMLET What?
HAMLET What, are they children? Who maintains ’em?
HAMLET What call you the “carriages”?
HAMLET What did you enact?
HAMLET What, frighted with false fire?
HAMLET What ho, Horatio!
HAMLET What hour now?
HAMLET What, looked he frowningly?
HAMLET What man dost thou dig it for?
HAMLET What’s his weapon?
HAMLET What’s the matter now?
HAMLET What woman then?
HAMLET 
HAMLET Who, I?
HAMLET Who commands them, sir?
HAMLET Who is to be buried in ’t?
HAMLET Whose was it?
HAMLET Why,
HAMLET Why?
HAMLET 
HAMLET Why,
HAMLET Why did you laugh, then, when I said “man
HAMLET Why, e’en so. And now my Lady Worm’s,
HAMLET 
HAMLET Why he more than another?
HAMLET 
HAMLET Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET Why, right, you are in the right.
HAMLET 
HAMLET Why, then, ’tis none to you, for there is
HAMLET Why, what should be the fear?
HAMLET With drink, sir?
HAMLET Words, words, words.
HAMLET 
HAMLET You are welcome.
HAMLET You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
HAMLET 
HAMLET Yours. Osric exits. He does well to commend
HAMLET Your wisdom should show itself more richer
HAMLET You should not have believed me, for virtue
HAMLET, advancing 
HAMLET, aside 
HAMLET, aside Nay, then, I have an eye of you.—If
HAMLET, aside These tedious old fools.
HAMLET, aside to Horatio Thy state is the more gracious,
HAMLET, taking the skull Let me see. Alas, poor
HAMLET, to Horatio What, the fair Ophelia?
HAMLET, to Laertes 
HAMLET, to Osric What imports the nomination of
HAMLET, within Mother, mother, mother!
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO A piece of him.
HORATIO 
HORATIO As thou art to thyself.
HORATIO 
HORATIO Ay, good my lord.
HORATIO Ay, my lord.
HORATIO Ay, my lord, and of calves’ skins too.
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO Custom hath made it in him a property of
HORATIO Do, if it will not stand.
HORATIO 
HORATIO E’en so.
HORATIO E’en so, my lord.
HORATIO Good my lord, be quiet.
HORATIO 
HORATIO Hail to your Lordship.
HORATIO Half a share.

HORATIO 

HORATIO Heavens secure him!
HORATIO 
HORATIO Here, sweet lord, at your service.
HORATIO 
HORATIO His purse is empty already; all ’s golden words
HORATIO How was this sealed?
HORATIO I beseech you.
HORATIO I did very well note him.
HORATIO If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
HORATIO I knew you must be edified by the margent
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO In faith, my lord, not I.
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO Is it a custom?
HORATIO Is ’t not possible to understand in another
HORATIO Is ’t possible?
HORATIO 
HORATIO I think it lacks of twelve.
HORATIO 
HORATIO It might, my lord.
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO It would have much amazed you.
HORATIO I warrant it will.
HORATIO Let Him bless thee too.
HORATIO Let them come in. Gentleman exits. I do not
HORATIO Look, my lord, it comes.
HORATIO/MARCELLUS  Ay, by heaven, my lord.
HORATIO/MARCELLUS  My lord, we will not.
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO My lord, I did,
HORATIO 
HORATIO My lord, my lord!
HORATIO 
HORATIO Nay, good my lord—
HORATIO 
HORATIO Never believe it.
HORATIO No, by no means.
HORATIO 
HORATIO Not a jot more, my lord.
HORATIO Not from his
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO Peace, who comes here?
HORATIO Propose the oath, my lord.
HORATIO Remember it, my lord!
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 

HORATIO That can I.

HORATIO That is most
HORATIO 
HORATIO There’s no offense, my lord.
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
HORATIO ’Tis here.
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO ’Twere to consider too curiously to consider
HORATIO 
HORATIO Very well, my lord.
HORATIO Well, my lord.
HORATIO Well, sit we down,
HORATIO What are they that would speak with me?
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO What is it you would see?
HORATIO What is ’t, my lord? We will.
HORATIO What news, my lord?
HORATIO What’s that, my lord?
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO Why, what a king is this!
HORATIO You might have rhymed.
HORATIO You will lose, my lord.
HORATIO, aside to Hamlet No, my good lord.
HORATIO reads the letter Horatio, when thou shalt have
Ha! ’Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
Had it th’ ability of life to thank you.
Had left the flushing in her gallèd eyes,
Had made his course t’ illume that part of heaven
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
Had witchcraft in ’t. He grew unto his seat,
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
Hamlet.
Hamlet.
Hamlet.
Hamlet,
Hamlet and Laertes are separated.
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
Hamlet exits.
Hamlet exits.
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
Hamlet the Dane.
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
Handing him a paper.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
Haste me to know ’t, that I, with wings as swift
Hast ta’en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Hath clawed me in his clutch,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
Have after. To what issue will this come?
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Have of your audience been most free and
Have we (as ’twere with a defeated joy,
Have you any further trade with us?
Have you forgot me?
Have you so slander any moment leisure
Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
Hazard so near ’s as doth hourly grow
He answers:
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.—
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Heaven will direct it.
He closes thus: “I know the gentleman.
He closes with you in this consequence:
He digs up a skull.
He digs up more skulls.
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.
He exits.
He exits.
He exits.
He exits.
He exits.
He exits.
He falls.
He falls to such perusal of my face
He gives a paper.
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
He hath not failed to pester us with message
He is dead and gone;
He is gone, he is gone,
He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
He likewise gives a frock or livery
Help, ho!
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
He never gave commandment for their death.
He never will come again.
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
He pulls Polonius’ body from behind the arras.
He puts Laertes’ hand into Hamlet’s.
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
He reads. To the celestial, and my soul’s idol, the
He reads the letter.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Here in the lobby.
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
Here’s the commission. Read it at more leisure.
Here stooping to your clemency,
Here’s to thy health.
Here’s yet some liquor left.He picks up the cup.
Here, thou incestuous, murd’rous, damnèd Dane,
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
He sheathes his sword.
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
He’s loved of the distracted multitude,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
He that thou knowest thine,
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
He waxes desperate with imagination.
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
He writes.
Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
Hic et ubique? Then we’ll shift our ground.
High on a stage be placed to the view,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
His access to me.
His beard was as white as snow,
His canon ’gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
His father’s death and our o’erhasty marriage.
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
His liberty is full of threats to all—
His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy.
His means of death, his obscure funeral
His nephew’s levies, which to him appeared
His silence will sit drooping.
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
Hoist with his own petard; and ’t shall go hard
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,

Holds such an enmity with blood of man

Hold you the watch tonight?
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
Horatio exits.
Horatio exits.
Horatio—or I do forget myself!
Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy
Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man
How all occasions do inform against me
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
How came he dead? I’ll not be juggled with.
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
How does the Queen?
How does your Honor for this many a day?
Howe’er my haps, my joys will ne’er begin.
How in my words somever she be shent,
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
How is ’t, my noble lord?
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
How now, Ophelia, what’s the matter?
How now? What news?
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
How now, what hath befallen?
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
How should I your true love know
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
How strange or odd some’er I bear myself
How these things came about. So shall you hear
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
Hyperion’s curls, the front of Jove himself,
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.
I am dead, Horatio.—Wretched queen, adieu.—
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.

I am sorry that with better heed and judgment

I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
I am very glad to see you. To Barnardo. Good
I bought an unction of a mountebank
I can no more. The King, the King’s to blame.
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
I could not but by her. The other motive
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
I dare not drink yet, madam—by and by.
I did repel his letters and denied
I do believe you think what now you speak,
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
I do not set my life at a pin’s fee.
I do receive your offered love like love
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
I doubt it is no other but the main—
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away,
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
If I had played the desk or table-book
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
If by direct or by collateral hand
If circumstances lead me, I will find
If damnèd custom have not brazed it so
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
If his chief good and market of his time
If it assume my noble father’s person,
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If it be so (as so ’tis put on me,
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.
If one could match you. The ’scrimers of their
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
If ’t be th’ affliction of his love or no
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
If there be any good thing to be done
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
If thou art privy to thy country’s fate,
If thou canst mutine in a matron’s bones,
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
If thou didst ever thy dear father love—
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
If with too credent ear you list his songs
If you desire to know the certainty
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
I had forgot! ’Tis so concluded on.
I had my father’s signet in my purse,
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
I ha ’t!
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
I have a speech o’ fire that fain would blaze,
I have a voice and precedent of peace
I have in quick determination
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
I have sworn ’t.
I hear him coming. Let’s withdraw, my lord.
I hear him coming.
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife;
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
I’ll be with you straight. Go a little before.
I’ll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
I’ll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
I’ll board him presently. O, give me leave.
I’ll call upon you ere you go to bed
I’ll cross it though it blast me.—Stay, illusion!
I’ll do ’t. Dost thou come here to whine?
I’ll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.
I’ll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
I’ll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
I’ll rant as well as thou.
I’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
I’ll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I’ll visit you.
I’ll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
Importing the surrender of those lands
I must be cruel only to be kind.
I must to England, you know that.
In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups,
In censure of his seeming.
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
Indeed, without an oath, I’ll make an end on ’t:
Indeed would make one think there might be
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
In filial obligation for some term
In further evil?
In general synod take away her power,
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.—
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
In honorable fashion—
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs,
In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
In noise so rude against me?
In obstinate condolement is a course
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
In second husband let me be accurst.
In that and all things will we show our duty.
In the corrupted currents of this world,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
In thee there is not half an hour’s life.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
In the rank sweat of an enseamèd bed,
In the same figure like the King that’s dead.
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Into a tow’ring passion.
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
Into the madness wherein now he raves
In what particular thought to work I know not,
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
In youth when I did love, did love,
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.
I pray you, go with me.
I pray you now receive them.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
“I saw him enter such a house of sale”—
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
I saw him yesterday,” or “th’ other day”
I say, away!—Go on. I’ll follow thee.
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
Is by a forgèd process of my death
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
I shall not look upon his like again.
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
I should have fatted all the region kites
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Is not this something more than fantasy?
Is not to stir without great argument,
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you—
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
I stay too long. But here my father comes.
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
Is thought-sick at the act.
Is very cunning in.
It beckons you to go away with it
It came to pass, as most like it was—
It could not move thus.
It did me yeoman’s service. Wilt thou know
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
It had been so with us, had we been there.
I thank you. Keep the door. Followers exit. O, thou
It hath the primal eldest curse upon ’t,
I think it be no other but e’en so.
I think it was to see my mother’s wedding.
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
It is a damnèd ghost that we have seen,
It is “adieu, adieu, remember me.”
It is an honest ghost—that let me tell you.
It is a nipping and an eager air.
It is a poison tempered by himself.


It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
It is most retrograde to our desire,
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
It is offended.

It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.
It lifted up its head and did address
It may be death.
It must be shortly known to him from England
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
It sends some precious instance of itself
It shall as level to your judgment ’pear
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
It spreads his arms.
It warms the very sickness in my heart
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
It was as I have seen it in his life,
It waves me forth again. I’ll follow it.
It waves me still.—Go on, I’ll follow thee.
It waves you to a more removèd ground.
It will be laid to us, whose providence
It will be short. The interim’s mine,
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.
It would be spoke to.
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
I will bestow him and will answer well
I will go pray.
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.She drinks.
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
I will take my leave of you.
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
I would not hear your enemy say so,
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
KING A Norman.
KING Alas, alas!
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING At supper where?
KING Attend!
KING 
KING Ay, Hamlet.
KING 
KING 
KING But how hath she received his love?
KING But where is he?
KING 
KING Conceit upon her father.
KING Dead.
KING 
KING 
KING From Hamlet? Who brought them?
KING Gertrude, do not drink.
KING Give me some light. Away!
KING 
KING Good Laertes,
KING 
KING Have you heard the argument? Is there no
KING 
KING He made confession of you
KING How do you, pretty lady?
KING How fares our cousin Hamlet?
KING 
KING How long hath she been thus?
KING How may we try it further?
KING 
KING I do not think ’t.
KING If it be so, Laertes
KING I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING It falls right.

KING It likes us well,

KING It shall be so.
KING 
KING 
KING Laertes, you shall hear
KING Let him demand his fill.
KING Let’s follow, Gertrude.
KING Let’s further think of this,
KING 
KING Not that I know.
KING 
KING Now, Hamlet, where’s Polonius?
KING 
KING O Gertrude, come away!
KING O, for two special reasons,
KING O heavy deed!
KING O, he is mad, Laertes!
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING Part them. They are incensed.
KING Pluck them asunder.
KING Pretty Ophelia—
KING 
KING She swoons to see them bleed.
KING 
KING So you shall,
KING 
KING Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
KING 
KING 
KING Thanks, dear my lord.
KING The doors are broke.
KING 
KING The very same.
KING 
KING 
KING Thy loving father, Hamlet.
KING 
KING ’Tis Hamlet’s character. “Naked”—
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING We will try it.
KING What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
KING What dost thou mean by this?
KING What do you call the play?
KING What is the cause, Laertes,
KING Where is Polonius?
KING Who shall stay you?
KING Why, now you speak
KING 
KING Will you know them, then?
KING 
KING, advancing with Polonius 
KING, aside 
KING, asideO, ’tis too true!
KING, rising 
KING, to Attendants. Go, seek him there.
KING, to Queen Do you think ’tis this?
Keeps wassail, and the swagg’ring upspring reels;
“King,” “Father,” “Royal Dane.” O, answer me!
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
King and Queen exit with Attendants.
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
King’s jester.
LAERTES A Norman was ’t?
LAERTES A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
LAERTES Alas, then she is drowned.
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES Ay, my lord,
LAERTES Come, my lord.They play.
LAERTES Come, one for me.
LAERTES Do you see this, O God?
LAERTES Drowned? O, where?
LAERTES Farewell.Laertes exits.
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES Have at you now!
LAERTES He is justly served.
LAERTES 
LAERTES How now, what noise is that?
LAERTES 
LAERTES I am satisfied in nature,
LAERTES 
LAERTES I pray you, give me leave.
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES It well appears. But tell me
LAERTES I will do ’t,
LAERTES Know you the hand?
LAERTES Lay her i’ th’ earth,
LAERTES Let this be so.
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES My dread lord,
LAERTES My lord, I will be ruled,
LAERTES 
LAERTES My will, not all the world.
LAERTES No.
LAERTES None but his enemies.
LAERTES O, fear me not.
LAERTES O, treble woe
LAERTES Say you so? Come on.Play.
LAERTES 
LAERTES Think it no more.
LAERTES 
LAERTES This nothing’s more than matter.
LAERTES 
LAERTES To cut his throat i’ th’ church.
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES Well, again.
LAERTES What ceremony else?
LAERTES What ceremony else?
LAERTES What out of this, my lord?
LAERTES What part is that, my lord?
LAERTES Where is my father?
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES Why ask you this?
LAERTES You mock me, sir.
LAERTES, aside 
LAERTES, coming out of the grave 
LAERTES, to Claudius 
LORD My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
LORD The King and Queen and all are coming down.
LORD The Queen desires you to use some gentle
LUCIANUS 
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Laertes,
“Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!”
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
Larded all with sweet flowers;
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
Leaps in the grave.
Leave us.Messenger exits.
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,


Lest with this piteous action you convert
Let Hercules himself do what he may,

Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
Let come what comes, only I’ll be revenged
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
Let in the maid, that out a maid
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
Let me be no assistant for a state,
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
(Let me not think on ’t; frailty, thy name is woman!),
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
Let’s do ’t, I pray, and I this morning know
Let’s follow. ’Tis not fit thus to obey him.
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
Like Niobe, all tears—why she, even she
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
Like to a murd’ring piece, in many places
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
Look here upon this picture and on this,
Looking before and after, gave us not
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Look to ’t, I charge you. Come your ways.
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
“Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
Lord Such-a-one’s horse when he went to beg it,
Lords attendant with the King’s guard carrying
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
MARCELLUS And liegemen to the Dane.
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS Holla, Barnardo.
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
MARCELLUS Is it not like the King?

MARCELLUS 

MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS Look with what courteous action
MARCELLUS Lord Hamlet.
MARCELLUS My good lord.
MARCELLUS 

MARCELLUS Nay, let’s follow him.

MARCELLUS No, it is struck.
MARCELLUS Nor I, my lord.
MARCELLUS Nor I, my lord, in faith.
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS Speak to it, Horatio.
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS ’Tis gone.
MARCELLUS ’Tis gone and will not answer.
MARCELLUS We have sworn, my lord, already.
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS, to Horatio 
MESSENGER Letters, my lord, from
MESSENGER 
MESSENGER Save yourself, my lord.
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
“Mad” call I it, for, to define true madness,
Mad for thy love?
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou ’lt mouth,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
Makes vow before his uncle never more
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
Make us again count o’er ere love be done!
Make you to ravel all this matter out
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.—
Marcellus?
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
March within.
Mark me.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,

May be a devil, and the devil hath power
May do t’ express his love and friending to you,
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
May give his saying deed, which is no further

May one be pardoned and retain th’ offense?
May sweep to my revenge.
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Methought it was very sweet
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee,
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
More honored in the breach than the observance.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
More relative than this. The play’s the thing
More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him
More than in words?
Most constantly.
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Most free in his reply.
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Most holy and religious fear it is
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
Most necessary ’tis that we forget
Most throughly for my father.
Most welcome home!
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Mother, you have my father much offended.
Much heat and him. I’ll silence me even here.
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
Must give us pause. There’s the respect
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
Must render up myself.
Must there no more be done?
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
My custom always of the afternoon,
My father, in his habit as he lived!
My father—methinks I see my father.
My father’s brother, but no more like my father
My father’s spirit—in arms! All is not well.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
My head should be struck off.
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.

My lord, I have.
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
My lord, I’ll hit him now.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
My lord, he’s going to his mother’s closet.
My lord, the King your father.
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
My stern effects. Then what I have to do

My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,

My tables—meet it is I set it down
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
My too much changèd son.—Go, some of you,
(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Nature is fine in love, and, where ’tis fine,
Nay, come, let’s go together.
Nay, then I’ll set those to you that can speak.
Nay, very pale.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbèd ground,
Never departed more.
Never make known what you have seen tonight.

Never to rise again. Thy mother’s poisoned.

Never to speak of this that you have heard.
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Niggard of question, but of our demands
No.
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
No med’cine in the world can do thee good.
No more.
No more—and by a sleep to say we end
No more, sweet Hamlet!
No more to undertake it, I will work him
No, my good lord, but as you did command
None wed the second but who killed the first.
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
No, no, he is dead.
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
No reck’ning made, but sent to my account
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne’er so thralled,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Nor thine on me.Dies.
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
Not of that dye which their investments show,
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones,
Not shriving time allowed.
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.
Not that I think you did not love your father,
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Not when I saw ’t.
Now I am alone.
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
Now falls on Priam.
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
Now out of this—
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
“Now the King drinks to Hamlet.” Come, begin.
Now wears his crown.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
O, I am slain!
O, O, O, O!Dies.
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA At home, my lord.
OPHELIA Ay, my lord.
OPHELIA Ay, my lord.
OPHELIA Belike this show imports the argument of the
OPHELIA Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
OPHELIA Do you doubt that?
OPHELIA Good my lord,
OPHELIA Heavenly powers, restore him!
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
OPHELIA Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA I shall obey, my lord.
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA I think nothing, my lord.
OPHELIA I was the more deceived.
OPHELIA Madam, I wish it may.
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA My lord?
OPHELIA My lord, I do not know,
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.
OPHELIA No more but so?
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA No, my lord.
OPHELIA O, help him, you sweet heavens!

OPHELIA 

OPHELIA 
OPHELIA Pray let’s have no words of this, but when
OPHELIA Pray you, mark.
OPHELIA Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA Still better and worse.
OPHELIA The King rises.
OPHELIA There’s fennel for you, and columbines.
OPHELIA There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance.
OPHELIA ’Tis brief, my lord.
OPHELIA ’Tis in my memory locked,
OPHELIA Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
OPHELIA What is, my lord?
OPHELIA What means this, my lord?
OPHELIA What means your Lordship?
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA Will he tell us what this show meant?
OPHELIA You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
OPHELIA You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
OPHELIA You are merry, my lord.
OPHELIA You are naught, you are naught. I’ll mark the
OPHELIA You must sing “A-down a-down”—and you
OPHELIA sings 
OPHELIA sings 
OPHELIA sings 
OPHELIA sings 
OSRIC A hit, a very palpable hit.
OSRIC Ay, my good lord.
OSRIC Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
OSRIC How is ’t, Laertes?
OSRIC I commend my duty to your Lordship.
OSRIC I know you are not ignorant—
OSRIC I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
OSRIC I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
OSRIC I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.
OSRIC It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
OSRIC Look to the Queen there, ho!
OSRIC Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
OSRIC Nothing neither way.
OSRIC Of Laertes?
OSRIC Rapier and dagger.
OSRIC Shall I deliver you e’en so?
OSRIC Sir?
OSRIC Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
OSRIC The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
OSRIC The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
OSRIC The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
OSRIC You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
OSRIC 
OSRIC Your Lordship is right welcome back to
OSRIC Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
OTHER But is this law?
OTHER Go to!
OTHER I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
OTHER Marry, now I can tell.
OTHER Mass, I cannot tell.
OTHER Nay, but hear you, goodman delver—
OTHER The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
OTHER Was he a gentleman?

OTHER “Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,

OTHER Why, he had none.
OTHER Why, ’tis found so.
OTHER Will you ha’ the truth on ’t? If this had not been
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
O, a pit of clay for to be made
Observe his inclination in yourself.
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
O’erbears your officers. The rabble call him “lord,”
O’ermaster ’t as you may. And now, good friends,
O’er this solidity and compound mass
O’er which his melancholy sits on brood,
O’er whom his very madness, like some ore
Of Hamlet’s transformation, so call it,
Of Hamlet’s wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
Of bell and burial.
Of blue Olympus.
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Offense’s gilded hand may shove by justice,
Of general assault.
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
Of him that brought them.
Of his affection to me.
Of his behavior.
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Of his true state.
Of impious stubbornness. ’Tis unmanly grief.
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
Of man and country—
Of mighty opposites.
Of mine own eyes.
Of my true mother.
Of reverend Priam, seemed i’ th’ air to stick.
(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
Of these dilated articles allow.
Of the unworthiest siege.
Of thinking too precisely on th’ event
Of this his nephew’s purpose, to suppress
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
Of unimprovèd mettle hot and full,

Of violent birth, but poor validity,

Of your dear father, is ’t writ in your revenge
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
O heavens, is ’t possible a young maid’s wits
O heavy burden!
O, here they come.
Oh, ho!
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
O limèd soul, that, struggling to be free,
O, methought there—a—was nothing—a—meet.
O most pernicious woman!
O, my dear lord—
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
On Fortune’s cap, we are not the very button.
On Mars’s armor, forged for proof eterne,
One fair daughter, and no more,
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,
One word more, good lady.
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
On plots and errors happen.
On such regards of safety and allowance
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
On wholesome life usurp immediately.

Ophelia, walk you here.—Gracious, so please you,

Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be an if they
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
Or by some habit that too much o’erleavens
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
Or for some frontier?
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Or in th’ incestuous pleasure of his bed,
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?
Or like a creature native and endued
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
Or not at all.
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Or pardoned being down? Then I’ll look up.
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
(Or then, or then, with such or such), “and as you
Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
O, say!
O, speak!



O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
Osric to put on his hat.

O, step between her and her fighting soul.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
O, the recorders! Let me see one. He takes a
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
O, throw away the worser part of it,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
Our purpose may hold there.—But stay, what
Our son shall win.
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
Out of his brows.
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
O vengeance!
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
Over the nasty sty!
O villain, villain, smiling, damnèd villain!
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.Osric exits.
O, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown!
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!

O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
PLAYER I hope we have reformed that indifferently
PLAYER I warrant your Honor.
PLAYER KING 
PLAYER KING 
PLAYER KING 
PLAYER KING 
PLAYER QUEEN 
PLAYER QUEEN O, confound the rest!
PLAYER QUEEN Sleep rock thy brain,
PLAYER QUEEN 
PLAYER QUEEN 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS And let him ply his music.
POLONIUS And the Queen too, and that presently.
POLONIUS And then, sir, does he this, he does—what
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS By th’ Mass, and ’tis like a camel indeed.
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS Come, sirs.
POLONIUS Do you know me, my lord?
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS Fare you well, my lord.
POLONIUS ’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS Give o’er the play.
POLONIUS God be wi’ you. Fare you well.
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS Honest, my lord?
POLONIUS I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i’ th’
POLONIUS If you call me “Jephthah,” my lord: I have a
POLONIUS I have, my lord.
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS I mean the matter that you read, my lord.
POLONIUS Indeed, that’s out of the air. Aside. How
POLONIUS It is backed like a weasel.
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS I will say so.

POLONIUS 

POLONIUS Lights, lights, lights!
POLONIUS Look whe’er he has not turned his color and
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS Marry, sir, here’s my drift,
POLONIUS Marry, well bethought.
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS My lord, I have news to tell you.
POLONIUS My lord, I will use them according to their
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
POLONIUS Not I, my lord.
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
POLONIUS That hath made him mad.
POLONIUS That’s good. “Moblèd queen” is good.
POLONIUS That’s very true, my lord.
POLONIUS The actors are come hither, my lord.
POLONIUS The best actors in the world, either for
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS This business is well ended.
POLONIUS This is too long.
POLONIUS ’Tis most true,
POLONIUS Upon my honor—
POLONIUS Very like a whale.
POLONIUS Well be with you, gentlemen.
POLONIUS What a treasure had he, my lord?
POLONIUS What do you think of me?


POLONIUS What follows then, my lord?
POLONIUS 

POLONIUS What is the matter, my lord?
POLONIUS What said he?
POLONIUS Wherefore should you do this?
POLONIUS With what, i’ th’ name of God?
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS, aside How say you by that? Still harping on
POLONIUS, aside Still on my daughter.
POLONIUS, aside Though this be madness, yet there is
POLONIUS, behind the arras 

POLONIUS, behind the arras What ho! Help!

POLONIUS, to the King Oh, ho! Do you mark that?
PROLOGUE 
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
Passing through nature to eternity.
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.
Perchance ’twill walk again.
Perpend.
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
Player Queen exits.
Players exit.
Players exit.
Play something like the murder of my father
Pleasant and helpful to him!
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Pointing to Polonius.
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Polonius.
Polonius exits.
Polonius exits.
Polonius exits.
Polonius hides behind the arras.
Popped in between th’ election and my hopes,
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
Pours the poison in his ears.
Pray you, be round with him.
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
Prepare to play.
Priam’s slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
Prithee say on. He’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Pursued my life.
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
QUEEN Alack,
QUEEN Alack, what noise is this?
QUEEN Alas, he’s mad.
QUEEN Alas, how is ’t with you,
QUEEN Alas, look here, my lord.
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN Ay, amen!
QUEEN Ay me, what act
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN Calmly, good Laertes.
QUEEN Came this from Hamlet to her?
QUEEN 
QUEEN Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
QUEEN Come, let me wipe thy face.
QUEEN Did he receive you well?
QUEEN Did you assay him to any pastime?
QUEEN Drowned, drowned.
QUEEN For love of God, forbear him.
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN Hamlet! Hamlet!
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN He’s fat and scant of breath.—
QUEEN 
QUEEN How fares my lord?
QUEEN How now, Ophelia?
QUEEN 
QUEEN If it be,
QUEEN I’ll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
QUEEN I shall obey you.
QUEEN It may be, very like.
QUEEN 
QUEEN I will not speak with her.
QUEEN Let her come in.Gentleman exits.
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN More matter with less art.
QUEEN Nay, but Ophelia—
QUEEN 
QUEEN No more!
QUEEN 
QUEEN No, nothing but ourselves.
QUEEN 
QUEEN O Hamlet, speak no more!
QUEEN 
QUEEN O me, what hast thou done?
QUEEN O my son, what theme?
QUEEN 
QUEEN O, speak to me no more!
QUEEN 
QUEEN So he does indeed.
QUEEN Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
QUEEN 
QUEEN The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
QUEEN 
QUEEN This is mere madness;
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN To whom do you speak this?
QUEEN 
QUEEN What shall I do?
QUEEN 
QUEEN What would she have?
QUEEN 
Quarreling, drabbing—you may go so far.
Queen exits.
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
Quoth she “Before you tumbled me,
REYNALDO As gaming, my lord.
REYNALDO At “closes in the consequence,” at “friend,
REYNALDO Ay, my lord, I would know that.
REYNALDO Ay, very well, my lord.
REYNALDO But, my good lord—
REYNALDO Good my lord.
REYNALDO I shall, my lord.
REYNALDO I will, my lord.
REYNALDO My lord, I did intend it.
REYNALDO 
REYNALDO My lord, that would dishonor him.
REYNALDO Very good, my lord.
REYNALDO Well, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ 

ROSENCRANTZ Ay, my lord.They exit.

ROSENCRANTZ Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
ROSENCRANTZ Ay, that they do, my lord—Hercules
ROSENCRANTZ Believe what?
ROSENCRANTZ Both your Majesties
ROSENCRANTZ Even those you were wont to take such
ROSENCRANTZ Faith, there has been much to-do on
ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN We’ll wait upon you.
ROSENCRANTZ Good my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ Good my lord, what is your cause of
ROSENCRANTZ Haply he is the second time come to
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ Ho! Bring in the lord.
ROSENCRANTZ How can that be, when you have the
ROSENCRANTZ I think their inhibition comes by the
ROSENCRANTZ I understand you not, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ Most like a gentleman.
ROSENCRANTZ My lord, there was no such stuff in my
ROSENCRANTZ My lord, you must tell us where the
ROSENCRANTZ My lord, you once did love me.
ROSENCRANTZ My most dear lord.
ROSENCRANTZ Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
ROSENCRANTZ Neither, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ No, indeed are they not.
ROSENCRANTZ None, my lord, but that the world’s
ROSENCRANTZ She desires to speak with you in her
ROSENCRANTZ Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ Then is the world one.
ROSENCRANTZ Then thus she says: your behavior hath
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ To think, my lord, if you delight not in
ROSENCRANTZ To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
ROSENCRANTZ To what end, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ We think not so, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ We will haste us.
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ What, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
ROSENCRANTZ Will ’t please you go, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ, to Guildenstern What say you?
ROSENCRANTZ, to Polonius God save you, sir.
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
Reads. High and mighty, you shall know I am set
Rebellious hell,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
Repast them with my blood.
Repent what’s past, avoid what is to come,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Requite him for your father.
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
Rest, rest, perturbèd spirit.—So, gentlemen,
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Richer than that which four successive kings
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
Rough-hew them how we will—
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Run barefoot up and down, threat’ning the flames
Running it thus) you’ll tender me a fool.
SAILOR God bless you, sir.
SAILOR He shall, sir, an ’t please Him. There’s a letter
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
Save me and hover o’er me with your wings,
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
’Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
Scene 4
Scene 5
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 4
Scene 2
Scene 2
Scene 5
Scene 6
Scene 1
Scene 3
Scene 7
Scene 1
Scene 3
Scene 3
Scene 4
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 2
Season your admiration for a while
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
“Seems,” madam? Nay, it is. I know not “seems.”
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.—
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Shall I strike it with my partisan?
Shall in the general censure take corruption
Shall we to th’ court? For, by my fay, I cannot
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
She is a strumpet. What news?
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
She lifts the cup.
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
She scatters flowers.
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
She turns to favor and to prettiness.
Should be as mortal as an old man’s life?
Should have a back or second that might hold
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
Should patch a wall t’ expel the winter’s flaw!
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
Since nature makes them partial, should o’erhear
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Sings.By Gis and by Saint Charity,
Sings. For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.


Sings.He is dead and gone, lady,
Sings.O, a pit of clay for to be made
Sings.Tomorrow is Saint Valentine’s day,
Sings.White his shroud as the mountain snow—

Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes—believe
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
Sir, in this audience
Sir, my good friend. I’ll change that name with you.
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
Sith nor th’ exterior nor the inward man
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to ’t.
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
So bloodily hast struck?
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
So by my former lecture and advice
So criminal and so capital in nature,
So excellent a king, that was to this
So far from cheer and from your former state,
So fast they follow. Your sister’s drowned, Laertes.
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
So horridly to shake our disposition
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
So is it, if thou knew’st our purposes.
So levied as before, against the Polack,
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Some little time, so by your companies
Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
So much as from occasion you may glean,
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
So much from th’ understanding of himself
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
So oft it chances in particular men

So please you, something touching the Lord

So, proceed you.
So tell him, with th’ occurrents, more and less,
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
Sound a flourish.
“So would I ’a done, by yonder sun,
So you will not o’errule me to a peace.
Speak loudly for him.
Speak, man.
Speak of it.The cock crows.
Speak to her, Hamlet.
Speak to me.
Speak to me.
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,



Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
Sprung from neglected love.—How now, Ophelia?

Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Stay and speak!—Stop it, Marcellus.

Stay, give me drink.—Hamlet, this pearl is thine.

Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Stick fiery off indeed.
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Subscribed it, gave ’t th’ impression, placed it
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
Such was the very armor he had on
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Swear by my sword.
Swear by my sword
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Take it to heart? Fie, ’tis a fault to heaven,
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear. For lo, his sword,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him,
T’ assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thence
Th’ ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,


Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,

Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Than to entreaty.
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,

Than your particular demands will touch it.

Th’ associates tend, and everything is bent
That I am guiltless of your father’s death
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
That I essentially am not in madness,
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
That I have longèd long to redeliver.
That I have positively said “’Tis so,”
That I have shot my arrow o’er the house
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks

That I might be the organ.

That I must be their scourge and minister.
That I must call ’t in question.
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
That I will speak to thee. I’ll call thee “Hamlet,”
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
That are so fortified against our story,
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
That beetles o’er his base into the sea,
That, being of so young days brought up with him
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
That can denote me truly. These indeed “seem,”
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
That capability and godlike reason
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me
That else leans on th’ affair. Pray you, make haste.
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
That ever I was born to set it right!
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
That flesh is heir to—’tis a consummation
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
That from her working all his visage wanned,
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
That has no relish of salvation in ’t—
That hath a stomach in ’t; which is no other
That hath in it no profit but the name.
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
That he, as ’twere by accident, may here
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
That he cried out ’twould be a sight indeed
That he is open to incontinency;
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
That he should weep for her? What would he do
That he’s mad, ’tis true; ’tis true ’tis pity,
That he which hath your noble father slain
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th’ ulcer:
That, if again this apparition come,
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
That is but scratched withal. I’ll touch my point
That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.
That it might please you to give quiet pass
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
That lend a tyrannous and a damnèd light
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
That makes calamity of so long life.
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
That might your nature, honor, and exception
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
That, opened, lies within our remedy.


That our devices still are overthrown;
That patient merit of th’ unworthy takes,

That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase; “beautified” is a
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
That she should lock herself from his resort,
That show of such an exercise may color
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
That’s not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests

That’s the end.

That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
That’s villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
That they are not a pipe for Fortune’s finger
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
That thou so many princes at a shot
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
That thus he suffers for.
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?—
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
That to the use of actions fair and good
That treason can but peep to what it would,
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
That was and is the question of these wars.
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
That we find out the cause of this effect,
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay,
That you know aught of me—this do swear,
That your good beauties be the happy cause
That youth and observation copied there,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
T’ have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
The King shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath,
The Other Man exits
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
The Queen falls.
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
The bell then beating one—
The better to beguile. This is for all:
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
The canker galls the infants of the spring
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
The corse they follow did with desp’rate hand
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue,
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
The devil himself.
The devil take thy soul!
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.She dies.
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
The fair Ophelia.—Nymph, in thy orisons
Th’ effect of what I wrote?
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
The form of plausive manners—that these men,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
The harlot’s cheek beautied with plast’ring art
The hart ungallèd play.


The head and source of all your son’s distemper.
The head is not more native to the heart,

The hearers to collection. They aim at it
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
The heyday in the blood is tame, it’s humble
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
The insolence of office, and the spurns
The instances that second marriage move
The instant burst of clamor that she made
The inward service of the mind and soul
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The leprous distilment, whose effect
The light and careless livery that it wears
The lists, and full proportions are all made
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
The need we have to use you did provoke
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
Then up he rose and donned his clothes
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
The ocean, overpeering of his list,

The origin and commencement of his grief
The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
The portraiture of his. I’ll court his favors.
The potent poison quite o’ercrows my spirit.
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
The rather if you could devise it so
The ratifiers and props of every word,
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
There falling out at tennis”; or perchance
Therefore I have entreated him along
Therefore, let’s follow.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,

There is a play tonight before the King.

There is a willow grows askant the brook
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
There lives within the very flame of love
There, my lord.
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
There’s letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
There’s matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
There’s never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
There’s rue for you, and here’s some for me; we
There’s such divinity doth hedge a king
There’s tricks i’ th’ world, and hems, and beats her
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
There was he gaming, there o’ertook in ’s rouse,
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th’ Hyrcanian beast—
The safety and the health of this whole state.
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
These hands are not more like.
The serpent that did sting thy father’s life
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
The single and peculiar life is bound
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
The soldier’s music and the rite of war
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
The tedious day with sleep.Sleeps.
The terms of our estate may not endure
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.
The time is out of joint. O cursèd spite
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
The triumph of his pledge.
The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
The unseen good old man.
The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
The very place puts toys of desperation,
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
The violence of either grief or joy
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
The which he lovèd passing well.
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
The woman will be out.—Adieu, my lord.
Th’ expectancy and rose of the fair state,
Th’ extravagant and erring spirit hies
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
They bleed on both sides.—How is it, my lord?
They bore him barefaced on the bier,
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
They cry “Choose we, Laertes shall be king!”
They enter with Hamlet.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.

They exit.

They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
They shall go far with little.
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
They withdraw.
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
Th’ imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Th’ important acting of your dread command?
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst

Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind

This above all: to thine own self be true,
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
This grave shall have a living monument.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
This is th’ impostume of much wealth and peace,
This is too heavy. Let me see another.
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
This man shall set me packing.
This marvel to you.
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
“This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth
This must not be.” And then I prescripts gave her,
This night to play before him.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
This present object made probation.
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
This realm dismantled was
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick’s skull, the
This something-settled matter in his heart,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
This sudden sending him away must seem
This unprevailing woe and think of us
This warlike volley.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange
Th’ observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
Th’ oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely,
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Thou com’st in such a questionable shape
Thou find’st to be too busy is some danger.
Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death
Thou knowest already.
Thou know’st ’tis common; all that lives must die,
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
Thou turn’st my eyes into my very soul,
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
Th’ unnervèd father falls. Then senseless Ilium,

Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,

“Thus didst thou.”
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
Thus runs the world away.
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand
Thy knotted and combinèd locks to part,
Thy natural magic and dire property
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
Till by some elder masters of known honor
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
’Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
’Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
’Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
’Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
’Tis now the very witching time of night,
’Tis strange.
’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
’Tis told me he hath very oft of late
(’Tis too much proved), that with devotion’s visage
’Tis too narrow for your mind.
To England send him, or confine him where
To Laertes. Strengthen your patience in our last
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
To Queen. Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
To a nunnery, go.He exits.
To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack,
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be commanded.
To be contracted in one brow of woe,

To be forestallèd ere we come to fall,
To be or not to be—that is the question:
To be your Valentine.
To both your honors.
To business with the King more than the scope
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
To contract—O—the time for—a—my behove,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
To do ’t. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
T’ o’ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Together with that fair and warlike form
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
To give it due content.
To give th’ assay of arms against your Majesty.
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
To give these mourning duties to your father.
To give the world assurance of a man.
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
To hear and see the matter.



To hear him so inclined.
To hear of it. They are here about the court,

To hear the process. I’ll warrant she’ll tax him
To heaven.
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
To him from whom you brought them.
To his confine, and of the truth herein

To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my arms

To his own scandal.
To his unmastered importunity.
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
To keep those many many bodies safe
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
To lay our service freely at your feet,
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
To let this canker of our nature come
To let you know of it.
To make it truster of your own report
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
To mine own room again, making so bold
To muddy death.
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
To offer it the show of violence,
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
To our most valiant brother—so much for him.
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
To punish me with this and this with me,
To put an antic disposition on)
To quit him with this arm? And is ’t not to be


To reason most absurd, whose common theme
To serve in such a difference. What devil was ’t

To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
To show my duty in your coronation,
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
To show yourself indeed your father’s son
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there’s the rub,
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
To speak of horrors—he comes before me.
To take him in the purging of his soul,
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
To tell my story.
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
To tell us this.
To th’ ambassadors of England gives
To the King. Be you and I behind an arras then.
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
To their lord’s murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
To the unsatisfied.
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
To those of mine.
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
To what I shall unfold.
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
To you alone.
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
To youth and liberty.
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
Treachery! Seek it out.
Truly deliver.
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
Trumpets the while.
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i’ th’ throat
’Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project

’Twere good she were spoken with, for she may

Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
Ungartered, and down-gyvèd to his ankle,
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
Unpeg the basket on the house’s top,
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!
Unto our climatures and countrymen.
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
Upon my life, Lamord.
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
Upon my sword.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Upon the platform, ’twixt eleven and twelve,
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands,
Upon whose property and most dear life
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
VOLTEMAND 
Videlicet, a brothel—or so forth. See you now
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes.
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.
Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
Was gagèd by our king, which had returned
Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
Was ’t Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
We beg your hearing patiently.He exits.
We cannot get from him.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
We go to gain a little patch of ground
We heard it all.—My lord, do as you please,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
Welcome, Horatio.—Welcome, good Marcellus.
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Welcome, my good friends.
We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings—
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence
We’ll put the matter to the present push.—
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Well said, old mole. Canst work i’ th’ earth so fast?—
We’ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
Well, we shall sift him.
We may of their encounter frankly judge
We must with all our majesty and skill
We o’erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Were thicker than itself with brother’s blood?
We shall express our duty in his eye;
We shall, my lord.Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
We should do when we would; for this “would”
We should profane the service of the dead
We will bestow ourselves. To Ophelia. Read on this
We would not understand what was most fit,
What I have said to you.
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
What art thou that usurp’st this time of night,
What company, at what expense; and finding
What does this mean, my lord?
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
What forgeries you please—marry, none so rank
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
What have I done, that thou dar’st wag thy tongue
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
What is he whose grief
What is ’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
What is ’t but to be nothing else but mad?
What is the issue of the business there.
What is the matter?
What is the reason that you use me thus?
What majesty should be, what duty is,
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
What’s near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
What think you on ’t?
What thou hast said to me.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
What warlike noise is this?
What we have two nights seen.
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
When I to sulf’rous and tormenting flames
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
When down her weedy trophies and herself
When he himself might his quietus make
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
When he lay couchèd in th’ ominous horse,
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
When honor’s at the stake. How stand I, then,
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
When in your motion you are hot and dry
When it proved otherwise?
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
When second husband kisses me in bed.
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
When thou liest howling.
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
When we would bring him on to some confession
When yond same star that’s westward from the pole
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
Where every god did seem to set his seal
Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the King.
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Wherein our Savior’s birth is celebrated,
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
Where is this king?—Sirs, stand you all without.
Where is your son?
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where, my lord?
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Where should we have our thanks?
Where’s your father?
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?

Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,

Where we shall find him most convenient.
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer
Which I have told thee of my father’s death.
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
Which bewept to the ground did not go
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
Which have solicited—the rest is silence.
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Which is not tomb enough and continent
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
Which now goes too free-footed.
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
Which was declining on the milky head
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
While one with moderate haste might tell a
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Whips out his rapier, cries “A rat, a rat,”
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I’ll go no
Who calls me “villain”? breaks my pate across?
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Who does it, then? His madness. If ’t be so,
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Who is ’t that can inform me?
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,


Whose blood and judgment are so well
Whose do you think it was?
Whose grave’s this, sirrah?

Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Whose violent property fordoes itself
Whose whisper o’er the world’s diameter,
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.—
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Why does the drum come hither?
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
Why, how now, Hamlet?
Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
Why seems it so particular with thee?
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Why the man dies.—I humbly thank you, sir.
Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
Why this same strict and most observant watch
Why thou art thus incensed.—Let him go,
Why thy canonized bones, hearsèd in death,
Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply.
Why to a public count I might not go
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
Why yet I live to say “This thing’s to do,”
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
Will not debate the question of this straw.
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
Will want true color—tears perchance for blood.
Will you be ruled by me?
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Will you two help to hasten them?
Winner and loser?
With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
With all my imperfections on my head.
With all my love I do commend me to you,
With all the strength and armor of the mind
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,

With an entreaty, herein further shown,

With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
With a sore distraction. What I have done
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
With forms to his conceit—and all for nothing!
With heated visage, as against the doom,
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
With—ho!—such bugs and goblins in my life,
Within his truncheon’s length, whilst they, distilled
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Within the center.
With juice of cursèd hebona in a vial
With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
With most miraculous organ. I’ll have these players
Without debatement further, more or less,
Without more motive, into every brain
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
Without the sensible and true avouch
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
With pestilent speeches of his father’s death,
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
With this regard their currents turn awry
With this slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
With true-love showers.
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
With variable objects, shall expel
With which she followed my poor father’s body,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts—
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Woo’t drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
Woo’t weep, woo’t fight, woo’t fast, woo’t tear
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly—
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
Would have reverted to my bow again,
Would make them capable. To the Ghost. Do not
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
Yea, from the table of my memory
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
Yes, faith, heartily.
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
Yet the unshapèd use of it doth move
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio—a fellow of infinite
You are the Queen, your husband’s brother’s wife,
You are the most immediate to our throne,
You are welcome, masters; welcome all.—I am glad
You, as your business and desire shall point you
You cannot call it love, for at your age
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
You do not understand yourself so clearly
You do remember all the circumstance?
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
You go not till I set you up a glass
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
You have been talked of since your travel much,
You heavenly guards!—What would your gracious
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
You know the wager?
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
You mainly were stirred up.
You must not put another scandal on him
You must not take for fire. From this time
You must translate; ’tis fit we understand them.
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
Young men will do ’t, if they come to ’t;
You promised me to wed.”
Your Grace has laid the odds o’ th’ weaker side.
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
Your hands, come then. Th’ appurtenance of welcome
Your leave and favor to return to France,
Your loneliness.—We are oft to blame in this
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
Your skill shall, like a star i’ th’ darkest night,
Your sudden coming-o’er, to play with you.
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
Your wisdom best shall think.
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
You shall not go, my lord.They hold back Hamlet.
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
You told us of some suit. What is ’t, Laertes?
about my heart. But it is no matter.
about of brains.
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
accent and good discretion.
ache to think on ’t.
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
affair.
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’
agreeing,
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
all after!
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
all “impawned,” as you call it?
am let to know it is.He hands Horatio a letter.
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
ancient gentlemen but gard’ners, ditchers, and
and Lords exit.
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
and his load too.
and light a quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.
and more strange return. Hamlet.
and must th’ inheritor himself have no more, ha?
and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows.
and presently.
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.
and then, you know,
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
are spent.
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages—
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.—
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
at that.—Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.
attractive.Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.
awhile but in the end accepts his love.
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother’s
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
a year. But, by ’r Lady, he must build churches, then,
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
baker’s daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
bastard,
beating. And, when you are asked this question
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals—and
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,

begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
be in ’s time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,

bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s
be one man picked out of ten thousand.
between
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
blood
body. Here’s a skull now hath lien you i’ th’ earth
body is and go with us to the King.
book,
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
bound for England—if your name be Horatio, as I
bounteous.
branches—it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
but variable service—two dishes but to one table.
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
calf there.—Be the players ready?
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
cannot keep counsel; they’ll tell all.
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
capons so.
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
certain.
certain convocation of politic worms are e’en at
changes
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
chiefly loved. ’Twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido, and
choler.
closet ere you go to bed.
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
come by and by.
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
commeddled
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
conscience.
conscience
continent of what part a gentleman would see.
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.
could you not?
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
crib shall stand at the king’s mess. ’Tis a chough,
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
damned
daughter.
daughter?
daughter that I love passing well.
deceived.
delight in, the tragedians of the city.
delights not me”?
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
desert.
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
digged. Could he dig without arms? I’ll put another
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
distempered.
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
dog, being a good kissing carrion—Have you a
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
drowned herself wittingly.
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
easiness.
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
edge.
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.
epitaph than their ill report while you live.
ere you had done.
even, sir.—
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging
except my life, except my life.
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
eyes.
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
fashion i’ th’ earth?
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
fee
fellowship in a cry of players?
figure?
find him not there, seek him i’ th’ other
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
fitted.
flattered?
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
foe,
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.
foolish ear.
for I’ll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.



for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is

for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
for ’tis a vice to know him. He hath much
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
for you, sir. It came from th’ ambassador that was
fret me, you cannot play upon me.
friend, look to ’t.
friends.
from me to you.
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
further.
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. To ’t again, come.
galls his kibe.—How long hast thou been
gentleman in our more rawer breath?
give you some violets, but they withered all when
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
good actor.
grave-maker?
grave-makers. They hold up Adam’s profession.
greenly
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
grown honest.
hadst thou!
halt for ’t. What players are they?
has tears in ’s eyes. Prithee, no more.
hath the daintier sense.
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
having th’ accent of Christians nor the gait of
head.
head.
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
heart,
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
height,
hell,
hence
her.
herself in her own defense?
her soul, she’s dead.
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
him
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
hither are they coming to offer you service.
hits.
hobby-horse is forgot.”
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For oh, for oh, the
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
hold their course for England; of them I have
home;
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
hours.
how express and admirable; in action how like
hundred.
if I could see the puppets dallying.
if philosophy could find it out.
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
in trial.
is—
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
it?
it! It is the false steward that stole his master’s
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
it himself. There are no tongues else for ’s
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
journeymen had made men, and not made them
keep,
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
know from what part of the world I should be
know not what we may be. God be at your table.
knows,
knows, what is ’t to leave betimes? Let be.
ladies, good night, good night.She exits.
lady’s chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
laid on him by them, in his meed he’s
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
last. Com’st thou to beard me in Denmark?—What,
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a

laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators

lay him i’ th’ cold ground. My brother shall know of
legs.
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
letters for you.
liest.
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We’ll
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
lines, which I would set down and insert in ’t,
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. ’Sblood,
look upon me,
lord?
lost,
love, and by what more dear a better
love is too unmannerly.
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
man after his desert and who shall ’scape
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
matter there.
may call it herb of grace o’ Sundays. You must wear
me!
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
means of the late innovation.
meeting between him and my daughter.—My lord,
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
method in ’t.—Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
middle of her favors?
might,”
might it not?
might it not?
mine.
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
mischance
mischief.
mock him not. First Player exits. My good friends,
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there’s
more.
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
more, for look where my abridgment comes.
more handsome than fine. One speech in ’t I
more on ’t. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
morning, ’twas then indeed.
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?”
most beautified Ophelia—
most best, believe it. Adieu.
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
most tyrannically clapped for ’t. These are now the
mother’s admiration? Impart.
mouth,
move
much to tell thee. Farewell.
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.
music. Look you, these are the stops.
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
my complexion.
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
my father died. They say he made a good end.
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
my mother looks, and my father died within ’s two
my young lady and mistress! By ’r Lady, your Ladyship
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
name’s Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
nation
nature. For anything so o’erdone is from the purpose
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
nature will.
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
next, say “a grave-maker.” The houses he makes
night’s speech.
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
noise?
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
northerly.
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
nothing more.
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.
not you ashamed to show, he’ll not shame to tell you
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in ’t, yet it is
now.
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
now o’erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
now, was and is to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all’s here
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
offense in ’t?
offense i’ th’ world.
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh
of very liberal conceit.
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
on your head. Sir, this is the matter—
or a carpenter?”
ordnance are shot off.
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
or so,” and “gentleman.”
our withers are unwrung.

out

out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
own image, and the very age and body of the time
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.
own life.
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
patience.
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
performance,
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
pity that great folk should have count’nance in this
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
play.
play.
played once i’ th’ university, you say?
players (as it is most like, if their means are
players; mark it.—You say right, sir, a Monday
player went to cuffs in the question.
play the fool nowhere but in ’s own house. Farewell.
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh

poison in the sleeper’s ears, and leaves him. The Queen
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the

progress through the guts of a beggar.
pronounced.
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
proverb is something musty.
purpose, confess thyself—
quaintly
quality. Come, a passionate speech.
question of the play be then to be considered.
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
quickly too. Farewell.
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
reading.
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
reason.
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
received it, and others whose judgments in such
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
recorder and turns to Guildenstern. To withdraw
recorders!
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, ’tis no great
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
relish of it. I loved you not.
replication should be made by the son of a king?
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
revenge.
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We’ll e’en to ’t
safely,
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
say,
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
sexton’s spade. Here’s fine revolution, an we had
shall be dry again.
shall be the end of my business.
shall command—or, rather, as you say, my mother.
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
shall see anon. ’Tis a knavish piece of work, but
shape of a camel?
should admit no discourse to your beauty.
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.
sings in grave-making.
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
so.
so. To me, it is a prison.
some frame and start not so wildly from my
something. Where did I leave?
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
sound,
speak.
speak.
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
spheres,
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: ’tis for the
stoup of liquor.
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
strew
struck her into amazement and admiration.
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
sword,
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
take longer time.
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
than with honesty?
that I have bad dreams.
that)
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
that often madness hits on, which reason and
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
that’s for thoughts.
that’s the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
the First Player. Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
the King’s pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
the author of affection, but called it an honest
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
thee.
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
their trial, the bubbles are out.
them,
them.—
them.
the men are as mad as he.
them exclaim against their own succession?
them, for there be of them that will themselves
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
them through and through the most fanned
them to controversy. There was for a while no
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
these are the only men.
the shadow of a dream.
the stairs into the lobby.
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
the trick to see ’t. Did these bones cost no more the
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
they ask you what it means, say you this:
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
this. I’ll speak to him again.—What do you read, my
this gentleman?
this line—let me see, let me see:
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
this soon.—Good my lord, will you see the players
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
thought,
thoughts.
thousand tenants.
three-and-twenty years.
through the arras.
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
th’ worst.
thyself,
time. After your death you were better have a bad
’tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
together
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
tomorrow. As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
tongue? You will to ’t, sir, really.
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
torches.
to see thee well.—Welcome, good friends.—O my
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
true. Let me question more in particular. What
truepenny?
turn.
’twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
’twere Cain’s jawbone, that did the first murder!
’twere—I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
uncle,
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
unfellowed.
upon this pipe?
us
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
utt’rance of harmony. I have not the skill.
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
vile king,
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: He reads.
villain!
voice of the King himself for your succession in
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o’
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
was an actor in Rome—
was born—he that is mad, and sent into England.
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
were to know himself.

what it means.

what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
which your modesties have not craft enough to
whipped for o’erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
whispers
whose lungs are tickle o’ th’ sear, and the lady
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
will more willingly part withal—except my life,
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.
wisdom
with

with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
with golden fire—why, it appeareth nothing to me

with him in excellence. But to know a man well
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
with me whether you were sent for or no.
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
with some Attendants.
with the body. The King is a thing—
with us, sir.
with you.
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
words are not mine.
word, the word to the action, with this special
work.Hurts the King.
work?
world to drown or hang themselves more than
worm.
would,”
would dozy th’ arithmetic of memory, and yet but
would it might be “hangers” till then. But on. Six
would not much approve me. Well, sir?
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
year.
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
you?
you,
you.
you.She exits.
you both?
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
you could go backward.
you down,
you lisp; you nickname God’s creatures and make
you love me, hold not off.
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
you play “The Murder of Gonzago”?
your bounty. Take them in.
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
your rue with a difference. There’s a daisy. I would
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
your smiling you seem to say so.
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I’ll no
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
you say—
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
you, though I know to divide him inventorially



Begin of sorted by rythm text:


OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
OPHELIA 
HAMLET Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
OSRIC 
CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND 
VOLTEMAND 
PROLOGUE 
PLAYER KING 
PLAYER KING 
PLAYER KING 
PLAYER KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 

KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
KING 
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
HAMLET I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
HAMLET A whole one, I.
OSRIC Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
HAMLET Excellent, i’ faith, of the chameleon’s dish. I
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Fall’n on th’ inventors’ heads. All this can I
HORATIO That can I.
HAMLET Who, I?
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
bound for England—if your name be Horatio, as I
’twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
HAMLET You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
more handsome than fine. One speech in ’t I
HORATIO In faith, my lord, not I.
GENTLEMAN 
PLAYER QUEEN 
PLAYER QUEEN 
PLAYER QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
QUEEN 
CAPTAIN 
CAPTAIN 
CAPTAIN 
GUILDENSTERN 
GUILDENSTERN 
GUILDENSTERN 
GUILDENSTERN 
FRANCISCO 
REYNALDO 
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO 
BARNARDO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 

HORATIO 

HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
HORATIO 
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
MESSENGER 
FIRST PLAYER 
FIRST PLAYER 
DOCTOR 
FORTINBRAS 
FORTINBRAS 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 



LAERTES 
LAERTES 
LAERTES 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 

POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
POLONIUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
MARCELLUS 
LUCIANUS 
ACT 3
ACT 4
ACT 5
ACT 2
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
HAMLET 
GHOST 
GHOST 
GHOST 
GHOST 
GHOST 
GHOST 
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ 
ROSENCRANTZ 
What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.
For Hecuba!
POLONIUS That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
HAMLET O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
That beetles o’er his base into the sea,
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
POLONIUS If you call me “Jephthah,” my lord: I have a
and must th’ inheritor himself have no more, ha?
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
most beautified Ophelia—
attractive.Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.
Enter Ophelia.
Enter Ophelia.
HAMLET, to Horatio What, the fair Ophelia?
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
Affront Ophelia.
QUEEN Nay, but Ophelia—
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
QUEEN How now, Ophelia?
Sprung from neglected love.—How now, Ophelia?
KING Pretty Ophelia—
HAMLET It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
While one with moderate haste might tell a
HAMLET I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
HAMLET Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
HAMLET We’ll ha ’t tomorrow night. You could, for a
OPHELIA Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a

O, the recorders! Let me see one. He takes a

OTHER The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase; “beautified” is a
HAMLET Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
HAMLET Let her not walk i’ th’ sun. Conception is a
dog, being a good kissing carrion—Have you a
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there’s the rub,
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
Enter Osric.
Come, some music!
POLONIUS And let him ply his music.
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.—
time. After your death you were better have a bad
And that our drift look through our bad
KING Dead.
HAMLET For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
A second time I kill my husband dead
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
We should profane the service of the dead
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
But let it be.—Horatio, I am dead.
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
her soul, she’s dead.
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
No, no, he is dead.
In the same figure like the King that’s dead.
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
Fall ten times treble on that cursèd head
head.
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
T’ o’ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
head.
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Which was declining on the milky head
With all my imperfections on my head.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
And, at our more considered time, we’ll read,
sexton’s spade. Here’s fine revolution, an we had
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
You are welcome, masters; welcome all.—I am glad
HAMLET How came he mad?
POLONIUS That hath made him mad.
QUEEN Alas, he’s mad.
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
What is ’t but to be nothing else but mad?
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
In the rank sweat of an enseamèd bed,
Go to thy deathbed.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
When second husband kisses me in bed.
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
closet ere you go to bed.
I’ll call upon you ere you go to bed
Good night. But go not to my uncle’s bed.
Or in th’ incestuous pleasure of his bed,
An thou hadst not come to my bed.”
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
HAMLET Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
pronounced.
To be commanded.
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Mother, you have my father much offended.
It is offended.
POLONIUS This business is well ended.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?
As false as dicers’ oaths—O, such a deed
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
OSRIC It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
HAMLET Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
Stick fiery off indeed.
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
POLONIUS By th’ Mass, and ’tis like a camel indeed.
A combination and a form indeed
morning, ’twas then indeed.
QUEEN So he does indeed.
That he cried out ’twould be a sight indeed
KING O heavy deed!
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
KING She swoons to see them bleed.
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
Let come what comes, only I’ll be revenged
’Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
And, where ’tis so, th’ offender’s scourge is weighed,
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
To the unsatisfied.
I did repel his letters and denied
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.
KING ’Tis Hamlet’s character. “Naked”—
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
OPHELIA ’Tis in my memory locked,
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
HORATIO How was this sealed?
commeddled
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne’er so thralled,
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
Within his truncheon’s length, whilst they, distilled
An understanding simple and unschooled.
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
LAERTES My lord, I will be ruled,
But let this same be presently performed
HORATIO You might have rhymed.
And carriage of the article designed,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
To hear him so inclined.
damned
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
them through and through the most fanned
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Never to rise again. Thy mother’s poisoned.
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
Was gagèd by our king, which had returned
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
Are joyfully returned.
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
QUEEN Drowned, drowned.
GRAVEDIGGER How can that be, unless she drowned
LAERTES Alas, then she is drowned.
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,


Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
His nephew’s levies, which to him appeared

Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
And that he calls for drink, I’ll have prepared
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
hundred.
Be all my sins remembered.
question of the play be then to be considered.
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
distempered.
flattered?
A sable silvered.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
HAMLET Pale or red?
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
KING Part them. They are incensed.
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
Hamlet and Laertes are separated.
Wherein our Savior’s birth is celebrated,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Enter Ophelia distracted.
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
ROSENCRANTZ Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
Which now goes too free-footed.
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
fitted.
Or like a creature native and endued
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
By desperate appliance are relieved
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
OPHELIA I was the more deceived.
deceived.
My father, in his habit as he lived!
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
LAERTES He is justly served.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
Not shriving time allowed.
unfellowed.
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?
You promised me to wed.”
HAMLET Safely stowed.
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
Let in the maid, that out a maid
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.

they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid

You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
HORATIO My lord, I did,
Come short of what he did.
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
HAMLET Do they hold the same estimation they did
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.
But if ’t be he I mean, he’s very wild,
To mine own room again, making so bold
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
To what I shall unfold.
(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
All from her father’s death, and now behold!
Should have a back or second that might hold
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
LAERTES My will, not all the world.
And let me speak to th’ yet unknowing world
offense i’ th’ world.
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
In the corrupted currents of this world,
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
your rue with a difference. There’s a daisy. I would
would,”
We should do when we would; for this “would”
That treason can but peep to what it would,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
Have of your audience been most free and
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
And both neglect. What if this cursèd hand
LAERTES Know you the hand?
The corse they follow did with desp’rate hand
But to recover of us, by strong hand
If by direct or by collateral hand
HAMLET No, by this hand.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
And hath shipped me into the land,
It must be shortly known to him from England
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
was born—he that is mad, and sent into England.
HAMLET Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
England.
HAMLET For England?
For England.
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
HAMLET O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
CAPTAIN Against some part of Poland.
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
Th’ important acting of your dread command?
No, my good lord, but as you did command
An eye like Mars’ to threaten and command,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
A royal knavery—an exact command,
that often madness hits on, which reason and
chiefly loved. ’Twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido, and
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
POLONIUS Look whe’er he has not turned his color and
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals—and
ancient gentlemen but gard’ners, ditchers, and
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
be one man picked out of ten thousand.
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
Conjures the wand’ring stars and makes them stand
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
HORATIO Do, if it will not stand.
HAMLET Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
my father died. They say he made a good end.
That’s the end.
No more—and by a sleep to say we end
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.
REYNALDO At “closes in the consequence,” at “friend,
HAMLET Yours. Osric exits. He does well to commend
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Perpend.
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
(As make your bouts more violent to that end)
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,


Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.

KING Attend!
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
If circumstances lead me, I will find
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
I must be cruel only to be kind.
A little more than kin and less than kind.
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
With all the strength and armor of the mind
Take these again, for to the noble mind
’Tis too narrow for your mind.
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
The single and peculiar life is bound
And, like a man to double business bound,
As it hath used to do, that I have found
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
But, better looked into, he truly found
Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round
Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbèd ground,
It waves you to a more removèd ground.
We go to gain a little patch of ground
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Hic et ubique? Then we’ll shift our ground.
HAMLET Upon what ground?
sound,
HAMLET O God!
LAERTES Do you see this, O God?
His canon ’gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
POLONIUS With what, i’ th’ name of God?
now o’erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
HAMLET Good.
I am very glad to see you. To Barnardo. Good
HAMLET Or of a courtier, which could say “Good
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
That to the use of actions fair and good
No med’cine in the world can do thee good.
POLONIUS ’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.

POLONIUS That’s good. “Moblèd queen” is good.

blood
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. ’Sblood,
A savageness in unreclaimèd blood,
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
Will want true color—tears perchance for blood.
Were thicker than itself with brother’s blood?
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
Repast them with my blood.
O’er which his melancholy sits on brood,
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
HAMLET That’s wormwood!
HAMLET It shall to the barber’s with your beard.—
About, my brains!—Hum, I have heard
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
Never to speak of this that you have heard.
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
Hoist with his own petard; and ’t shall go hard
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
bastard,
you could go backward.
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Enter a Lord.
So please you, something touching the Lord
LAERTES My dread lord,
GUILDENSTERN My honored lord.
MARCELLUS My good lord.
FIRST PLAYER What speech, my good lord?
HORATIO, aside to Hamlet No, my good lord.
REYNALDO But, my good lord—
OSRIC Ay, my good lord.
Th’ ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
ROSENCRANTZ Ho! Bring in the lord.
How is ’t, my noble lord?
I’ll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
O’erbears your officers. The rabble call him “lord,”
ROSENCRANTZ My most dear lord.
O, my dear lord—
GUILDENSTERN In what, my dear lord?
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?”
OPHELIA My lord?
meeting between him and my daughter.—My lord,
MARCELLUS Nor I, my lord.
POLONIUS Not I, my lord.
POLONIUS I mean the matter that you read, my lord.
ALL Armed, my lord.
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
ROSENCRANTZ To what end, my lord?
OPHELIA Good my lord,
REYNALDO Good my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ Good my lord.
A truant disposition, good my lord.
HORATIO Ay, good my lord.
HORATIO Nay, good my lord—
REYNALDO Very good, my lord.
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
HORATIO My lord, my lord!
ROSENCRANTZ Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
POLONIUS What a treasure had he, my lord?
OPHELIA At home, my lord.
POLONIUS Do you know me, my lord?
There, my lord.
Where, my lord?
QUEEN Alas, look here, my lord.
HORATIO Not a jot more, my lord.
HORATIO There’s no offense, my lord.
HORATIO You will lose, my lord.
POLONIUS That’s very true, my lord.
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
POLONIUS I have, my lord.
OPHELIA ’Tis brief, my lord.


MESSENGER Save yourself, my lord.
GUILDENSTERN A “thing,” my lord?

OPHELIA I think nothing, my lord.
REYNALDO As gaming, my lord.
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
HORATIO Propose the oath, my lord.
REYNALDO I shall, my lord.
REYNALDO Well, my lord.
HORATIO Well, my lord.
POLONIUS Fare you well, my lord.
HORATIO Very well, my lord.
HAMLET Very well, my lord.
REYNALDO Ay, very well, my lord.
REYNALDO I will, my lord.
What does this mean, my lord?
POLONIUS What follows then, my lord?
HORATIO/MARCELLUS  Ay, by heaven, my lord.
GUILDENSTERN Prison, my lord?
OPHELIA No, my lord.
ALL We do, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ Will ’t please you go, my lord?
MARCELLUS Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
HORATIO E’en so, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ We think not so, my lord.
KING Thanks, dear my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ Neither, my lord.
POLONIUS The actors are come hither, my lord.
POLONIUS What is the matter, my lord?
method in ’t.—Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
QUEEN How fares my lord?
OPHELIA Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.
LAERTES What out of this, my lord?
OPHELIA What means this, my lord?
OPHELIA What is, my lord?
OPHELIA You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
HORATIO What news, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ What, my lord?
LAERTES What part is that, my lord?
HORATIO What’s that, my lord?
HORATIO It might, my lord.
GUILDENSTERN I know no touch of it, my lord.
HORATIO Remember it, my lord!
They bleed on both sides.—How is it, my lord?
CAPTAIN I will do ’t, my lord.
Do not, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ I understand you not, my lord.
POLONIUS Honest, my lord?
The woman will be out.—Adieu, my lord.
I hear him coming. Let’s withdraw, my lord.
OPHELIA Ay, my lord.
OPHELIA Ay, my lord.
lord?
HORATIO Ay, my lord.
FIRST PLAYER Ay, my lord.
FIRST PLAYER Ay, my lord.
LAERTES Ay, my lord,
GUILDENSTERN What should we say, my lord?
OPHELIA I shall obey, my lord.
OPHELIA You are merry, my lord.
Upon my life, Lamord.
GUILDENSTERN Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
HAMLET O, but she’ll keep her word.
sword,
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear. For lo, his sword,
He sheathes his sword.
And now I’ll do ’t.He draws his sword.
GHOST, beneath Swear by his sword.
Upon my sword.
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
And for that purpose I’ll anoint my sword.
Swear by my sword
Swear by my sword.
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
HAMLET Ay, lady, it was my word.
The ratifiers and props of every word,
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
HAMLET Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
HAMLET Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
know from what part of the world I should be
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
To quit him with this arm? And is ’t not to be
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
A minist’ring angel shall my sister be
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
knows, what is ’t to leave betimes? Let be.
Indeed would make one think there might be
QUEEN If it be,
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Unto that element. But long it could not be
GRAVEDIGGER It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
Ha! ’Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
But this eternal blazon must not be
HAMLET Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
So you will not o’errule me to a peace.
This is th’ impostume of much wealth and peace,
I have a voice and precedent of peace
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
HAMLET Then saw you not his face?
QUEEN Come, let me wipe thy face.
He falls to such perusal of my face
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Get you a place.
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
As he in his particular act and place
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
A double blessing is a double grace.
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
But it reserved some quantity of choice
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice

Offense’s gilded hand may shove by justice,

So by my former lecture and advice
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
HORATIO Here, sweet lord, at your service.
hither are they coming to offer you service.
O vengeance!
There falling out at tennis”; or perchance
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
mischance
performance,
HAMLET Ay, sir, that soaks up the King’s countenance,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
LAERTES A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
OPHELIA There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance.
As fits a king’s remembrance.
I’ll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
You do remember all the circumstance?
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
More honored in the breach than the observance.
On such regards of safety and allowance
HAMLET How chances it they travel? Their residence,
It will be laid to us, whose providence
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
hence
Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thence
conscience
conscience.
And yet it is almost against my conscience.
And call the noblest to the audience.
Sir, in this audience
patience.
Which have solicited—the rest is silence.
We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence
To offer it the show of violence,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
I pray you pass with your best violence.
And can you by no drift of conference
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
But pardon ’t as you are a gentleman. This presence
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
He closes with you in this consequence:
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
HAMLET How long is that since?
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
HAMLET I am tame, sir. Pronounce.
OPHELIA Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
And what’s in prayer but this twofold force,
Sings.O, a pit of clay for to be made
O, a pit of clay for to be made
The instant burst of clamor that she made
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
The lists, and full proportions are all made
A pickax and a spade, a spade,
And recks not his own rede.
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
KING, aside 
LAERTES, aside 
HAMLET, aside 
Couch we awhile and mark.They step aside.
Your Grace has laid the odds o’ th’ weaker side.
GUILDENSTERN We will ourselves provide.
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
Gertrude.—
KING Let’s follow, Gertrude.
He’s loved of the distracted multitude,
fee
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
I do not set my life at a pin’s fee.
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
Bear ’t that th’ opposèd may beware of thee.
thee.
Why seems it so particular with thee?
For what advancement may I hope from thee
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.
Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee,
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.—
It waves me still.—Go on, I’ll follow thee.
I say, away!—Go on. I’ll follow thee.
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
O limèd soul, that, struggling to be free,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
Enter King and two or three.
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
For by the image of my cause I see
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
T’ have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
continent of what part a gentleman would see.
HORATIO What is it you would see?
this line—let me see, let me see:
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
To keep those many many bodies safe


That makes calamity of so long life.
own life.
Upon whose property and most dear life

Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
It was as I have seen it in his life,
Should be as mortal as an old man’s life?
The serpent that did sting thy father’s life
In thee there is not half an hour’s life.
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Pursued my life.
With—ho!—such bugs and goblins in my life,
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
except my life, except my life.
will more willingly part withal—except my life,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.
murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.
You are the Queen, your husband’s brother’s wife,
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife;
And prey on garbage.
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
His father’s death and our o’erhasty marriage.
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
You cannot call it love, for at your age
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
(’Tis too much proved), that with devotion’s visage
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Colleaguèd with this dream of his advantage,
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
edge.
The triumph of his pledge.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
We may of their encounter frankly judge
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
Of the unworthiest siege.
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
’Tis strange.
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.
This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange
HAMLET ’Tis very strange.
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
revenge.
Of your dear father, is ’t writ in your revenge
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
May sweep to my revenge.
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
GRAVEDIGGER I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
POLONIUS What said he?
HAMLET He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
the men are as mad as he.
KING But where is he?
branches—it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
Like Niobe, all tears—why she, even she
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
HAMLET There’s another. Why may not that be the
Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
HAMLET Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
ROSENCRANTZ My lord, you must tell us where the
the trick to see ’t. Did these bones cost no more the
ROSENCRANTZ How can that be, when you have the
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the

assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the

HAMLET I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
OPHELIA Belike this show imports the argument of the
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For oh, for oh, the
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
HAMLET No such matter. I will not sort you with the
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
OPHELIA You are naught, you are naught. I’ll mark the
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick’s skull, the
He reads. To the celestial, and my soul’s idol, the
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
HAMLET I am but mad north-north-west. When the
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
HAMLET Then you live about her waist, or in the
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
HAMLET The phrase would be more germane to the
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
HAMLET The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: ’tis for the
HAMLET Ay, sir, but “While the grass grows”—the
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
most tyrannically clapped for ’t. These are now the
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
ROSENCRANTZ I think their inhibition comes by the
GRAVEDIGGER Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
Thou know’st ’tis common; all that lives must die,
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Armed at point exactly, cap-à-pie,
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
you lisp; you nickname God’s creatures and make
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
When he himself might his quietus make
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
These hands are not more like.
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?—
how express and admirable; in action how like
QUEEN It may be, very like.
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
KING The doors are broke.
Clamb’ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
The need we have to use you did provoke
GRAVEDIGGER Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
HAMLET Or like a whale.
POLONIUS Very like a whale.
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.


Nay, very pale.
“I saw him enter such a house of sale”—
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable

For it is as the air, invulnerable,
As of a man faithful and honorable.
but variable service—two dishes but to one table.
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
know not what we may be. God be at your table.
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.—
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
HORATIO Is ’t possible?
HAMLET Is ’t possible?
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
The heyday in the blood is tame, it’s humble
HAMLET O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!
uncle,
HAMLET They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
Woo’t drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
’Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
Deprived thee of!—Hold off the earth awhile,
BARNARDO Sit down awhile,
Season your admiration for a while
As to expend your time with us awhile
I’ll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
Absent thee from felicity awhile
Trumpets the while.
Bestow this place on us a little while.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
Ungartered, and down-gyvèd to his ankle,
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
When yond same star that’s westward from the pole
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
HAMLET Thou pray’st not well.They grapple.
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
LORD The Queen desires you to use some gentle
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
They shall go far with little.
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
And set a double varnish on the fame
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
Alack and fie for shame,

By Cock, they are to blame.

I can no more. The King, the King’s to blame.
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
That hath in it no profit but the name.
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
KING The very same.
Quoth she “Before you tumbled me,
Capitol. Brutus killed me.
me!
And they shall hear and judge ’twixt you and me.
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
QUEEN O my son, what theme?
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
To speak of horrors—he comes before me.
Can you advise me?
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
HAMLET “By and by” is easily said. Leave me,
ROSENCRANTZ My lord, you once did love me.
POLONIUS What do you think of me?
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.
HORATIO What are they that would speak with me?
I pray you, go with me.
To punish me with this and this with me,
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time

Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
All in the morning betime,

own image, and the very age and body of the time
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
take longer time.
QUEEN Did you assay him to any pastime?
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
If his chief good and market of his time
You must not take for fire. From this time
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
But that I know love is begun by time
HAMLET In happy time.
Mark me.
LAERTES It well appears. But tell me
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
Who is ’t that can inform me?
look upon me,
fret me, you cannot play upon me.
And to the last bended their light on me.
If it be so (as so ’tis put on me,
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
Come.
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
was an actor in Rome—
HAMLET Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
To let this canker of our nature come
HAMLET You are welcome.
Your hands, come then. Th’ appurtenance of welcome
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
Be as ourself in Denmark.—Madam, come.
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
gallows may do well to thee. To ’t again, come.
That, if again this apparition come,
Repent what’s past, avoid what is to come,
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
Have after. To what issue will this come?
GHOST My hour is almost come
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
O, here they come.
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
Most welcome home!
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
home;
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
What thou hast said to me.
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
with golden fire—why, it appeareth nothing to me
Speak to me.
Speak to me.
Of his affection to me.
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
His access to me.
It is “adieu, adieu, remember me.”
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
“King,” “Father,” “Royal Dane.” O, answer me!
LAERTES Come, one for me.
HAMLET Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me
By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me!
And do ’t the speedier that you may direct me
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
Have you forgot me?
delights not me”?
To do ’t. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
In noise so rude against me?
How all occasions do inform against me
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
Will you be ruled by me?
QUEEN Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
HAMLET One.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here, thou incestuous, murd’rous, damnèd Dane,
MARCELLUS And liegemen to the Dane.
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
Hamlet the Dane.
Scene 1
Scene 1
Scene 1
Scene 1
Scene 5
Scene 4
Scene 3
Scene 4
Scene 3
Scene 2
Scene 5
Scene 2
Scene 4
Scene 2
Scene 2
Scene 6
Scene 7
Scene 3
Scene 2
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
Nature is fine in love, and, where ’tis fine,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine—
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
Stay, give me drink.—Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
HAMLET Thou dost lie in ’t, to be in ’t and say it is thine.
He that thou knowest thine,
I’ll do ’t. Dost thou come here to whine?
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
HAMLET It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
To those of mine.
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
It will be short. The interim’s mine,
mine.
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
HAMLET That I can keep your counsel and not mine
words are not mine.
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
To be your Valentine.
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
ere you had done.
Away, for everything is sealed and done
DOCTOR No more be done.
Must there no more be done?
Make us again count o’er ere love be done!
If there be any good thing to be done
With a sore distraction. What I have done

ROSENCRANTZ Then is the world one.

Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.
And thou must cure me. Till I know ’tis done,
QUEEN O me, what hast thou done?
And what’s untimely done. …
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
He is dead and gone;
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
The bell then beating one—
MARCELLUS ’Tis gone.
He is gone, he is gone,
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
Now I am alone.
Attends the boist’rous ruin. Never alone
And in a postscript here, he says “alone.”
To you alone.
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
OTHER Why, he had none.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
From another one?
You are the most immediate to our throne,
ROSENCRANTZ Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
At his heels a stone.
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
And a man’s life’s no more than to say “one.”
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
On Mars’s armor, forged for proof eterne,
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
foe,
HAMLET Nor the soles of her shoe?
HAMLET From top to toe?
LAERTES O, treble woe
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
man after his desert and who shall ’scape
I’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
Thou com’st in such a questionable shape
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
upon this pipe?
To business with the King more than the scope
An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope.
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
For the supply and profit of our hope,
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
HORATIO Half a share.
HAMLET I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
players (as it is most like, if their means are
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware

all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.

GRAVEDIGGER ’Twill not be seen in him there. There
But, to my mind, though I am native here
Much heat and him. I’ll silence me even here.
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
HORATIO Peace, who comes here?
BARNARDO ’Tis here.
HORATIO ’Tis here.
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all’s here
Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
HAMLET Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
That youth and observation copied there,
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
HAMLET Do you see nothing there?
KING, to Attendants. Go, seek him there.
HAMLET I would I had been there.
It had been so with us, had we been there.
BARNARDO Say, what, is Horatio there?
matter there.
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
What is the issue of the business there.
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
LAERTES Drowned? O, where?
To England send him, or confine him where
KING At supper where?
That he, as ’twere by accident, may here
To their lord’s murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
Doubt thou the stars are fire,
HAMLET What, frighted with false fire?
And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
As if it some impartment did desire
(For every man hath business and desire,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
It is most retrograde to our desire,
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
O’er whom his very madness, like some ore
I’ll be with you straight. Go a little before.
And thus o’ersizèd with coagulate gore,
Never departed more.
GRAVEDIGGER Why, there thou sayst. And the more
nothing more.
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
HAMLET No, good mother. Here’s metal more
more.
QUEEN No more!
No more.
One fair daughter, and no more,
has tears in ’s eyes. Prithee, no more.
QUEEN O, speak to me no more!
QUEEN O Hamlet, speak no more!
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
LAERTES Think it no more.
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
Makes vow before his uncle never more
Even while men’s minds are wild, lest more
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
I’ll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.
HAMLET Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
Elsinore?
The terms of our estate may not endure
And pity ’tis ’tis true—a foolish figure,
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
figure?
HAMLET That you must teach me. But let me conjure
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
HAMLET O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
Here’s the commission. Read it at more leisure.
Have you so slander any moment leisure
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
LAERTES I am satisfied in nature,
So criminal and so capital in nature,
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Among a mineral of metals base,
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
We heard it all.—My lord, do as you please,
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
KING I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
HAMLET Good sir, whose powers are these?
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
noise?
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
For food and diet to some enterprise
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
For who that’s but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
When it proved otherwise?
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
LAERTES What ceremony else?
LAERTES What ceremony else?
herself in her own defense?
For art and exercise in your defense,
But to confront the visage of offense?
May one be pardoned and retain th’ offense?
(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
hath the daintier sense.
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.
Hast ta’en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
nature. For anything so o’erdone is from the purpose
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
When he lay couchèd in th’ ominous horse,
OPHELIA Still better and worse.
In obstinate condolement is a course
And with th’ incorporal air do hold discourse?
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
I had my father’s signet in my purse,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus’ pause,
That I have shot my arrow o’er the house
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
There was he gaming, there o’ertook in ’s rouse,
If thou art privy to thy country’s fate,
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
’Tis told me he hath very oft of late
And our affairs from England come too late.
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
GENTLEMAN She is importunate,
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Let me be no assistant for a state,
Fordo its own life. ’Twas of some estate.
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
Th’ imperial jointress to this warlike state,
The safety and the health of this whole state.
Of his true state.
So far from cheer and from your former state,
Th’ expectancy and rose of the fair state,
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
(As it doth well appear unto our state)

Yorick! I knew him, Horatio—a fellow of infinite

The time is out of joint. O cursèd spite
As of a father; for let the world take note,
As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note,
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
Th’ effect of what I wrote?
That else leans on th’ affair. Pray you, make haste.
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
HAMLET If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue,
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
What have I done, that thou dar’st wag thy tongue
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
Enter Prologue.
GRAVEDIGGER A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
This above all: to thine own self be true,
KING, asideO, ’tis too true!
As I do live, my honored lord, ’tis true.
HAMLET In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
POLONIUS ’Tis most true,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
HAMLET You should not have believed me, for virtue
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
something. Where did I leave?
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
I’ll board him presently. O, give me leave.
LAERTES I pray you, give me leave.
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
My lord, I have.
hold their course for England; of them I have
QUEEN What would she have?
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
more on ’t. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have

HORATIO reads the letter Horatio, when thou shalt have

Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
GENTLEMAN Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.—
But he’s an arrant knave.
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
LAERTES, coming out of the grave 
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
Leaps in the grave.
OTHER I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
And not have strewed thy grave.
HAMLET Into my grave?
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes—believe
Before my God, I might not this believe
(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
And thy commandment all alone shall live
HAMLET Nay, but to live
epitaph than their ill report while you live.
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
I could not but by her. The other motive
Upon the platform, ’twixt eleven and twelve,
HORATIO I think it lacks of twelve.
Buys out the law. But ’tis not so above:
Anon, as patient as the female dove
Fare you well, my dove.
To contract—O—the time for—a—my behove,
But never doubt I love.
In youth when I did love, did love,
I do receive your offered love like love
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
There lives within the very flame of love
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
This is the very ecstasy of love,
And with no less nobility of love
Could not with all their quantity of love
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
If thou didst ever thy dear father love—
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
HAMLET I could interpret between you and your love,
KING But how hath she received his love?
awhile but in the end accepts his love.
HAMLET As woman’s love.
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
For women fear too much, even as they love,
Mad for thy love?
move
The instances that second marriage move
Doubt that the sun doth move,
Yet the unshapèd use of it doth move
For ’tis a question left us yet to prove
As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
There’s rue for you, and here’s some for me; we
As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could an if we
GUILDENSTERN Faith, her privates we.
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
As day does to your eye.
A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.
We shall express our duty in his eye;
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
I have a speech o’ fire that fain would blaze,
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
HAMLET, aside Nay, then, I have an eye of you.—If
mischief.
What is he whose grief
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
The origin and commencement of his grief
Of impious stubbornness. ’Tis unmanly grief.
By his cockle hat and staff
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
My head should be struck off.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.
ordnance are shot off.
you love me, hold not off.
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half
And live the purer with the other half!
Hyperion’s curls, the front of Jove himself,
So much from th’ understanding of himself
The devil himself.
were to know himself.
It is a poison tempered by himself.
When down her weedy trophies and herself
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
Observe his inclination in yourself.
Given private time to you, and you yourself
And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself
It sends some precious instance of itself
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
Being a thing immortal as itself?
Whose violent property fordoes itself
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
HORATIO As thou art to thyself.
thyself,
purpose, confess thyself—
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
Must render up myself.
How strange or odd some’er I bear myself
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
Horatio—or I do forget myself!
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
Behind the arras I’ll convey myself
HAMLET It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
HAMLET I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
ROSENCRANTZ Good my lord, what is your cause of
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
HAMLET It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
HAMLET, to Osric What imports the nomination of
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
And that I see, in passages of proof,
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
having th’ accent of Christians nor the gait of
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
Than fly to others that we know not of?
HAMLET ’Tis well. I’ll have thee speak out the rest of
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
lay him i’ th’ cold ground. My brother shall know of
HORATIO Custom hath made it in him a property of
observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
At his head a grass-green turf,
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
MARCELLUS Is it not like the King?
There is a play tonight before the King.
Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the King.
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
An earnest conjuration from the King,
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
body is and go with us to the King.
But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
work.Hurts the King.
HAMLET Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
Enter King.
HAMLET, advancing 
reading.
I think it was to see my mother’s wedding.
What company, at what expense; and finding
agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging
with the body. The King is a thing—
HAMLET Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
More relative than this. The play’s the thing
at that.—Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?
HAMLET Nothing.
Did nothing.
BARNARDO I have seen nothing.
With forms to his conceit—and all for nothing!
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
And then it started like a guilty thing
There’s such divinity doth hedge a king
replication should be made by the son of a king?
As kill a king?
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
sings in grave-making.
And can say nothing—no, not for a king
This man shall set me packing.
They cry “Choose we, Laertes shall be king!”
Comes armèd through our watch so like the king
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
vile king,
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
As ’twere a thing a little soiled i’ th’ working,


That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
“Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!”
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,

I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
When thou liest howling.
In censure of his seeming.
I hear him coming.
HAMLET Upon the talk of the poisoning?
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
His silence will sit drooping.
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
POLONIUS Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
HAMLET Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?
The canker galls the infants of the spring
HAMLET That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
KING, rising 
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
And sure I am two men there is not living
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
GUILDENSTERN O, there has been much throwing
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
if I could see the puppets dallying.
Lords attendant with the King’s guard carrying
Therefore I have entreated him along
POLONIUS This is too long.
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
HAMLET Very like. Stayed it long?
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
Believe so much in him that he is young,
our withers are unwrung.
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.
HAMLET Am I not i’ th’ right, old Jephthah?
Whose grave’s this, sirrah?
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
quality. Come, a passionate speech.
night’s speech.
(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
I’ll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
lady’s chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Appears before them and with solemn march
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
LAERTES To cut his throat i’ th’ church.
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
Why this same strict and most observant watch
Hath clawed me in his clutch,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
for ’tis a vice to know him. He hath much
You have been talked of since your travel much,
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
Without the sensible and true avouch
ROSENCRANTZ Even those you were wont to take such
As if I had never been such.
received it, and others whose judgments in such

of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh

And then this “should” is like a spendthrift sigh,
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
crib shall stand at the king’s mess. ’Tis a chough,
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
A stallion! Fie upon ’t! Foh!
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
Sound a flourish.
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
We’ll put the matter to the present push.—
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
It may be death.
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Why thy canonized bones, hearsèd in death,
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
But that the dread of something after death,
He never gave commandment for their death.
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
That I am guiltless of your father’s death
With pestilent speeches of his father’s death,
Which I have told thee of my father’s death.
Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death
Gives me superfluous death.
To muddy death.
Is by a forgèd process of my death
And hears it roar beneath.
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
QUEEN He’s fat and scant of breath.—
The King shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath,
gentleman in our more rawer breath?
ROSENCRANTZ Then thus she says: your behavior hath
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
OSRIC Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
MARCELLUS Nor I, my lord, in faith.
POLONIUS I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i’ th’
with
How came he dead? I’ll not be juggled with.
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Here’s to thy health.
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
you both?
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
As the indifferent children of the earth.
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
fashion i’ th’ earth?
LAERTES Lay her i’ th’ earth,
body. Here’s a skull now hath lien you i’ th’ earth
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
Cry to be heard, as ’twere from heaven to earth,
“This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth
For he himself is subject to his birth.
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
mouth,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou ’lt mouth,
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
A very ribbon in the cap of youth—
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
And of all Christians’ souls, I pray God. God be wi’
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
O, speak!
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
speak.
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
Nay, then I’ll set those to you that can speak.
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
I do believe you think what now you speak,
KING Why, now you speak
speak.
But what we do determine oft we break.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
QUEEN Alack,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
HAMLET So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
So levied as before, against the Polack,
To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack,
Of reverend Priam, seemed i’ th’ air to stick.
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
A very very—pajock.
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
MARCELLUS No, it is struck.
So bloodily hast struck?
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
And with a larger tether may he walk
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
I bought an unction of a mountebank
As level as the cannon to his blank
What forgeries you please—marry, none so rank
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
Your wisdom best shall think.
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
KING Gertrude, do not drink.
Enter Hamlet reading on a book.
If I had played the desk or table-book
book,
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
There is a willow grows askant the brook
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
HAMLET That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
There’s never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
Denmark?


At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.

Denmark.
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
OPHELIA Pray you, mark.
OPHELIA Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
Arousèd vengeance sets him new a-work,
work?
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To his own scandal.
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Where every god did seem to set his seal
As e’er my conversation coped withal.
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
And for your rapier most especial,
word, the word to the action, with this special
in trial.
Of bell and burial.
GRAVEDIGGER Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
Christian burial.
Christian burial.
With juice of cursèd hebona in a vial
AMBASSADOR The sight is dismal,
His means of death, his obscure funeral
My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.
’Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
What’s near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
shape of a camel?
And bear it to the chapel.
With variable objects, shall expel
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
POLONIUS It is backed like a weasel.
HAMLET Methinks it is like a weasel.
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,

When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,

of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
In further evil?
But our cold maids do “dead men’s fingers” call
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all

To be forestallèd ere we come to fall,

BARNARDO Last night of all,
And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And where th’ offense is, let the great ax fall.
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
GRAVEDIGGER Why, because he was mad. He shall
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
KING So you shall,
cannot keep counsel; they’ll tell all.
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
His liberty is full of threats to all—
The better to beguile. This is for all:
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And so, without more circumstance at all,
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Or not at all.
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We’ll
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
As if he had been loosèd out of hell
hell,
Rebellious hell,
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
OTHER Marry, now I can tell.
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
OTHER Mass, I cannot tell.
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
much to tell thee. Farewell.
play the fool nowhere but in ’s own house. Farewell.
quickly too. Farewell.
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
QUEEN Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
The which he lovèd passing well.
daughter that I love passing well.

with him in excellence. But to know a man well
HAMLET I have heard of your paintings too, well
Whose blood and judgment are so well
And for my means, I’ll husband them so well

Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
I will bestow him and will answer well
KING It likes us well,
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
My father’s spirit—in arms! All is not well.
“And, in part, him, but,” you may say, “not well.
HAMLET That’s two of his weapons. But, well—
HAMLET I am glad to see you well.
POLONIUS God be wi’ you. Fare you well.
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
QUEEN Did he receive you well?
HAMLET I humbly thank you, well.
KING Let him demand his fill.
Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
We must with all our majesty and skill
utt’rance of harmony. I have not the skill.
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
HAMLET I will.
HORATIO If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
Aside. They fool me to the top of my bent.—I will
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
HORATIO What is ’t, my lord? We will.
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
nature will.
ALL We will, we will.
Rough-hew them how we will—
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
And reason panders will.
(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
HORATIO I warrant it will.
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.—
All flaxen was his poll.
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
Of unimprovèd mettle hot and full,
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
He digs up a skull.
Running it thus) you’ll tender me a fool.
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
HAMLET O, wonderful!
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
And my imaginations are as foul

The inward service of the mind and soul
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
To take him in the purging of his soul,
Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul
God ’a mercy on his soul.
The devil take thy soul!
Even with the very comment of thy soul
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Thou turn’st my eyes into my very soul,
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
HAMLET Good madam.
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
the shadow of a dream.

That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.

Now falls on Priam.
That can denote me truly. These indeed “seem,”
This sudden sending him away must seem
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
But not where I have aimed them.
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
them,
You must translate; ’tis fit we understand them.
journeymen had made men, and not made them
I pray you now receive them.
them.
Do you believe his “tenders,” as you call them?
Will you two help to hasten them?
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
them.—

KING From Hamlet? Who brought them?

Of him that brought them.
To him from whom you brought them.
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
HAMLET What, are they children? Who maintains ’em?
him
And from his mother’s closet hath he dragged him.
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
We o’erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
This night to play before him.
OPHELIA Heavenly powers, restore him!
HORATIO Heavens secure him!
HORATIO I did very well note him.
And will not let belief take hold of him
HORATIO A piece of him.
Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him,
HAMLET Ay, sir, what of him?
OSRIC Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
Pray you, be round with him.
That, being of so young days brought up with him
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
No more to undertake it, I will work him
We cannot get from him.
Did not together pluck such envy from him
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
You must not put another scandal on him
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
Addicted so and so.” And there put on him
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Pleasant and helpful to him!
At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him.
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
QUEEN For love of God, forbear him.
That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him
To our most valiant brother—so much for him.
Speak loudly for him.
REYNALDO My lord, that would dishonor him.
FIRST PLAYER Anon he finds him
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
Well, we shall sift him.
More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him
MARCELLUS Nay, let’s follow him.
To hear the process. I’ll warrant she’ll tax him
But not by him.
Let’s follow. ’Tis not fit thus to obey him.
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
wisdom
With heated visage, as against the doom,
I’ll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
MESSENGER Letters, my lord, from
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
And to the manner born, it is a custom
HORATIO Is it a custom?
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th’ alarm,
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
In filial obligation for some term
Together with that fair and warlike form
And there assume some other horrible form
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
But as we often see against some storm
worm.
Th’ unnervèd father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
the First Player. Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
And, like the kind life-rend’ring pelican,
GRAVEDIGGER Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
So much as from occasion you may glean,
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
That I might be the organ.
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
world to drown or hang themselves more than
GRAVEDIGGER What is he that builds stronger than
To give the world assurance of a man.
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
HAMLET As thou ’rt a man,
HAMLET Then I would you were so honest a man.
Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man
HAMLET Why did you laugh, then, when I said “man
The unseen good old man.
Sith nor th’ exterior nor the inward man
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.
OTHER Was he a gentleman?
ROSENCRANTZ Most like a gentleman.
or so,” and “gentleman.”
He closes thus: “I know the gentleman.
Like a good child and a true gentleman.

“Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,”

this gentleman?
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
Speak, man.
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.
(Let me not think on ’t; frailty, thy name is woman!),
O most pernicious woman!
KING A Norman.
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
And we cast away moan.
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
Shall I strike it with my partisan?
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
Fie on ’t, ah fie! ’Tis an unweeded garden
O heavy burden!
GRAVEDIGGER Why, here in Denmark. I have been
About the world have times twelve thirties been
OTHER Will you ha’ the truth on ’t? If this had not been
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
galls his kibe.—How long hast thou been
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
OPHELIA You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
It is a damnèd ghost that we have seen,
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
What we have two nights seen.
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
Enter the Player King and Queen.
poison in the sleeper’s ears, and leaves him. The Queen
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.
How does the Queen?
Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Enter Queen.
HAMLET “The moblèd queen”?
But who, ah woe, had seen the moblèd queen—
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
between
When honor’s at the stake. How stand I, then,
KING Will you know them, then?
HAMLET What woman then?
But if the gods themselves did see her then
To the King. Be you and I behind an arras then.
a year. But, by ’r Lady, he must build churches, then,
give you some violets, but they withered all when
OPHELIA Pray let’s have no words of this, but when
And with such maimèd rites? This doth betoken
How now, what hath befallen?
QUEEN Ay, amen!
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
ALL Gentlemen!
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
Rest, rest, perturbèd spirit.—So, gentlemen,
Come hither, gentlemen,

POLONIUS Well be with you, gentlemen.

The form of plausive manners—that these men,
So oft it chances in particular men
these are the only men.
Unto our climatures and countrymen.
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
On plots and errors happen.
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
Had made his course t’ illume that part of heaven
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
To heaven.
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
And so he goes to heaven,
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
Take it to heart? Fie, ’tis a fault to heaven,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
As oft as any passions under heaven
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
OSRIC The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
I shall not look upon his like again.
He never will come again.
And will he not come again?
And will he not come again?
HAMLET Nay, come again.
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Perchance ’twill walk again.
LAERTES Well, again.
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.
But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
And the King’s rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Would have reverted to my bow again,
GRAVEDIGGER ’Tis a quick lie, sir; ’twill away again
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
shall be dry again.
HAMLET A murderer and a villain,
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
O villain, villain, smiling, damnèd villain!
villain!
With this slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
O, I am slain!
That he which hath your noble father slain

But in battalions: first, her father slain;

Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
I doubt it is no other but the main—
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
This is the very coinage of your brain.
PLAYER QUEEN Sleep rock thy brain,
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Without more motive, into every brain
certain.
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!
And never come mischance between us twain.
HAMLET Up from my cabin,
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
A noise within: “Let her come in!”
ALL No, let’s come in!
To his confine, and of the truth herein
HAMLET So you mis-take your husbands.—Begin,
“Now the King drinks to Hamlet.” Come, begin.
And, as the world were now but to begin,
Howe’er my haps, my joys will ne’er begin.
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Is very cunning in.
A noise within.
A noise within.

March within.

Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
A march afar off and shot within.
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
Compounded it with dust, whereto ’tis kin.
your bounty. Take them in.
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
name’s Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
voice of the King himself for your succession in
HAMLET Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
And, after, we will both our judgments join
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
ROSENCRANTZ To think, my lord, if you delight not in
HAMLET Do you see yonder cloud that’s almost in
Our son shall win.
Such was the very armor he had on
I had forgot! ’Tis so concluded on.
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
Give us the foils. Come on.
And be not from his reason fall’n thereon,
And prologue to the omen coming on,
POLONIUS, aside How say you by that? Still harping on
In honorable fashion—
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
ROSENCRANTZ To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Into a tow’ring passion.
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
them exclaim against their own succession?
When we would bring him on to some confession



grave-makers. They hold up Adam’s profession.
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,

I’ll cross it though it blast me.—Stay, illusion!
This present object made probation.
That flesh is heir to—’tis a consummation
nation
And gem of all the nation.
He waxes desperate with imagination.
I have in quick determination
To show my duty in your coronation,
HAMLET I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
The very place puts toys of desperation,
struck her into amazement and admiration.
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
GHOST Do not forget. This visitation
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
And they in France of the best rank and station
OSRIC I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?
means of the late innovation.
MARCELLUS Look with what courteous action
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
And could of men distinguish, her election
accent and good discretion.
GUILDENSTERN Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
That’s villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
According to the phrase or the addition
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
So horridly to shake our disposition
But with much forcing of his disposition.
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Shall in the general censure take corruption

player went to cuffs in the question.

To be or not to be—that is the question:
By this encompassment and drift of question
That I must call ’t in question.
beating. And, when you are asked this question
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
And thus the native hue of resolution
By the o’ergrowth of some complexion
my complexion.
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
For what we know must be and is as common
Ay, madam, it is common.
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
To put an antic disposition on)
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
ROSENCRANTZ Faith, there has been much to-do on
And his sandal shoon.
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
My custom always of the afternoon,
HAMLET What’s his weapon?
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon—
That capability and godlike reason
(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
ALL Treason, treason!
reason.
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Forcing him to drink the poison.
so. To me, it is a prison.
HAMLET Denmark’s a prison.
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
OSRIC I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
If it assume my noble father’s person,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.—
Where is your son?
Than that which dearest father bears his son
To show yourself indeed your father’s son
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son—
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
On Fortune’s cap, we are not the very button.
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
For he was likely, had he been put on,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on

When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn

We shall, my lord.Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Guildenstern.
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
Both countenance and excuse.—Ho, Guildenstern!
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
turn.
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.
“So would I ’a done, by yonder sun,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Th’ observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
HORATIO Well, sit we down,
LORD The King and Queen and all are coming down.
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
And break your own neck down.
HAMLET And smelt so? Pah!He puts the skull down.
As therein are set down.
My tables—meet it is I set it down
you down,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
As are companions noted and most known


Now wears his crown.
As if increase of appetite had grown

Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
O, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown!
That our devices still are overthrown;
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
HAMLET Be not too tame neither, but let your own
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
LAERTES No.
No.
HAMLET No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
QUEEN What shall I do?
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
That he should weep for her? What would he do

Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?

You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
And, in part, him.” Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
And let them know both what we mean to do
Why yet I live to say “This thing’s to do,”
MARCELLUS Holla, Barnardo.
Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
HAMLET ’Swounds, show me what thou ’t do.
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o’
you play “The Murder of Gonzago”?
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
Why thou art thus incensed.—Let him go,
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
As infinite as man may undergo,
But let that go.
Which bewept to the ground did not go
Be ruled. You shall not go.
Why to a public count I might not go
OSRIC Look to the Queen there, ho!
Oh, ho!
Help, ho!
HAMLET Between who?
HAMLET Saw who?
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
HAMLET O, I die, Horatio!
HAMLET In my mind’s eye, Horatio.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?—
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
HAMLET To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
HAMLET What ho, Horatio!
MARCELLUS, to Horatio 
HAMLET I humbly thank you, sir. Aside to Horatio.
Enter Horatio.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
MARCELLUS Speak to it, Horatio.
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
HAMLET His beard was grizzled, no?
them to controversy. There was for a while no
KING Have you heard the argument? Is there no
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I’ll no
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I’ll go no
HAMLET How if I answer no?
If ’t be th’ affliction of his love or no
with me whether you were sent for or no.
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
and his load too.
HORATIO Let Him bless thee too.
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too,
HORATIO Ay, my lord, and of calves’ skins too.
KING Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
OTHER Why, ’tis found so.
KING It shall be so.
LAERTES Let this be so.
Who does it, then? His madness. If ’t be so,
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
OPHELIA Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
HORATIO E’en so.
I think it be no other but e’en so.
OSRIC Shall I deliver you e’en so?
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
so.
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
That I have positively said “’Tis so,”
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
capons so.
That’s not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
If damnèd custom have not brazed it so
The rather if you could devise it so
HAMLET No, by the rood, not so.
OPHELIA No more but so?
And let him know so.
POLONIUS I will say so.
your smiling you seem to say so.
I would not hear your enemy say so,
It would be spoke to.
ROSENCRANTZ Haply he is the second time come to
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
which your modesties have not craft enough to
OSRIC Your Lordship is right welcome back to
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
GUILDENSTERN Good my lord, put your discourse into
OTHER Go to!
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
Ay, “fashion” you may call it. Go to, go to!
now, was and is to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to
HAMLET Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
tomorrow. As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
HAMLET I beseech you, remember. He motions to
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’
for I’ll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
my mother looks, and my father died within ’s two
But two months dead—nay, not so much, not two.
HAMLET Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
HAMLET I mean, my head upon your lap?
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
keep,
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep—
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep—
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
For some must watch, while some must sleep:
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
HORATIO Hail to your Lordship.

OSRIC I commend my duty to your Lordship.

OPHELIA What means your Lordship?
my young lady and mistress! By ’r Lady, your Ladyship
POLONIUS, behind the arras What ho! Help!
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Unpeg the basket on the house’s top,
Give him the cup.
He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.
Here’s yet some liquor left.He picks up the cup.
She lifts the cup.
You mainly were stirred up.
Or pardoned being down? Then I’ll look up.
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up—
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
And I’ll be placed, so please you, in the ear
All given to mine ear.
HAMLET Why, what should be the fear?
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
For we will fetters put about this fear,
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
HAMLET For God’s love, let me hear!
HAMLET Nor did you nothing hear?
KING Laertes, you shall hear
HAMLET Speak. I am bound to hear.
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
Since nature makes them partial, should o’erhear
foolish ear.
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
How these things came about. So shall you hear
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.
It shall as level to your judgment ’pear
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
And in his grave rained many a tear.
Woo’t weep, woo’t fight, woo’t fast, woo’t tear
GHOST cries under the stage Swear.
GHOST, beneath Swear.
GHOST, beneath Swear.
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
That you know aught of me—this do swear,
Consent to swear.
may call it herb of grace o’ Sundays. You must wear
year.
Quarreling, drabbing—you may go so far.
progress through the guts of a beggar.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Doubt truth to be a liar,
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
Being nature’s livery or fortune’s star,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
“Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
The soldier’s music and the rite of war
And foreign mart for implements of war,
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th’ ulcer:
HORATIO ’Twere to consider too curiously to consider
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
KING Pluck them asunder.
And, but that great command o’ersways the order,
And, as I think, they have already order
HAMLET Murder?
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
Can serve my turn? “Forgive me my foul murder”?
’twere Cain’s jawbone, that did the first murder!
Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer
You know the wager?
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
OSRIC Rapier and dagger.
Thou find’st to be too busy is some danger.
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
Enter a Messenger.
HAMLET In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
That they are not a pipe for Fortune’s finger
BARNARDO/MARCELLUS Longer, longer.
HAMLET Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
HAMLET Your wisdom should show itself more richer
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
This must not be.” And then I prescripts gave her,
QUEEN I will not speak with her.
ROSENCRANTZ She desires to speak with you in her
her.
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
QUEEN Came this from Hamlet to her?
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
There’s tricks i’ th’ world, and hems, and beats her
But you must know your father lost a father,
KING Conceit upon her father.
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Not that I think you did not love your father,
My lord, the King your father.
To give these mourning duties to your father.
Requite him for your father.
Where’s your father?
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
My father—methinks I see my father.
My father’s brother, but no more like my father
Give me my father!
Play something like the murder of my father
HAMLET The King my father?
Most throughly for my father.
LAERTES Where is my father?
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
together
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
Nay, come, let’s go together.
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Go to your rest. At night we’ll feast together.
GRAVEDIGGER For none, neither.
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
Why does the drum come hither?
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
HAMLET No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,


Folded the writ up in the form of th’ other,
find him not there, seek him i’ th’ other
HAMLET O wonderful son that can so ’stonish a mother!
’Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,

A bloody deed—almost as bad, good mother,
’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Of my true mother.
Farewell, dear mother.
HAMLET, within Mother, mother, mother!
HAMLET We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
But yet to me they’re strong. The Queen his mother
Good night, mother.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.—
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
shall command—or, rather, as you say, my mother.
Enter Gravedigger and Another.
This is too heavy. Let me see another.
HAMLET Why he more than another?
HORATIO Is ’t not possible to understand in another
digged. Could he dig without arms? I’ll put another
That hath a stomach in ’t; which is no other
As kill a king and marry with his brother.
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
And hurt my brother.
May give his saying deed, which is no further
further.
KING How may we try it further?
They bore him barefaced on the bier,
He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
Or for some frontier?
Enter Osric, a courtier.
grave-maker?
choler.
GUILDENSTERN No, my lord, with choler.
For ’tis the sport to have the enginer
HAMLET Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
And pious action we do sugar o’er
Giving them a paper.

Handing him a paper.

He gives a paper.
The head and source of all your son’s distemper.
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
HAMLET At supper.
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Winner and loser?
GRAVEDIGGER Give me leave. Here lies the water;
Whose whisper o’er the world’s diameter,
all after!
daughter?
daughter.
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
POLONIUS, aside Still on my daughter.
Within the center.
or a carpenter?”



either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
King’s jester.

That I must be their scourge and minister.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.
HAMLET Nay, do not think I flatter,

And, like a neutral to his will and matter,

To hear and see the matter.
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
on your head. Sir, this is the matter—
What is the matter?
How now, Ophelia, what’s the matter?
HAMLET Now, mother, what’s the matter?
LAERTES This nothing’s more than matter.
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
about my heart. But it is no matter.
love, and by what more dear a better
am let to know it is.He hands Horatio a letter.
SAILOR He shall, sir, an ’t please Him. There’s a letter
He reads the letter.
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
That I have longèd long to redeliver.
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Truly deliver.
OTHER Nay, but hear you, goodman delver—
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
Giving to you no further personal power
In general synod take away her power,
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
MARCELLUS ’Tis gone and will not answer.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
OSRIC Sir?
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
affair.
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair—


HAMLET Are you fair?
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.

It is a nipping and an eager air.
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
If one could match you. The ’scrimers of their
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
POLONIUS My lord, I will use them according to their
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
LAERTES You mock me, sir.
GRAVEDIGGER Mine, sir.
GUILDENSTERN The King, sir—
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,

HAMLET With drink, sir?

would not much approve me. Well, sir?
HAMLET Who commands them, sir?
HAMLET Of him, sir.
GRAVEDIGGER For no man, sir.
even, sir.—
HAMLET Come on, sir.
with us, sir.
ROSENCRANTZ, to Polonius God save you, sir.
Why the man dies.—I humbly thank you, sir.
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,

HAMLET Hear you, sir,

SAILOR God bless you, sir.
God bless you, sir.
CAPTAIN They are of Norway, sir.
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
HAMLET O good Horatio, I’ll take the ghost’s word for
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
And all we mourn for.
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
POLONIUS The best actors in the world, either for
That thus he suffers for.
HAMLET What man dost thou dig it for?
GUILDENSTERN My lord, we were sent for.
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
HAMLET But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
Of his behavior.
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
That show of such an exercise may color
ALL Our duty to your Honor.
PLAYER I warrant your Honor.
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
Till by some elder masters of known honor
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
POLONIUS Upon my honor—
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
And dupped the chamber door,
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
HAMLET, taking the skull Let me see. Alas, poor
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
good actor.
stoup of liquor.
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
Prithee say on. He’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
And in the porches of my ears did pour
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
HAMLET To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
ROSENCRANTZ Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
KING Alas, alas!
Fortinbras.
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.


POLONIUS, behind the arras 
He pulls Polonius’ body from behind the arras.

Polonius hides behind the arras.
through the arras.
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
This realm dismantled was
for you, sir. It came from th’ ambassador that was
It came to pass, as most like it was—
Whose do you think it was?
GRAVEDIGGER A whoreson mad fellow’s it was.
OSRIC Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs,

vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: He reads.

Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
HAMLET That’s a fair thought to lie between maids’
Do not forever with thy vailèd lids
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
ROSENCRANTZ None, my lord, but that the world’s
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
HAMLET Hold off your hands.
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
Importing the surrender of those lands
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands,
As low as to the fiends!
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
O’ermaster ’t as you may. And now, good friends,
mock him not. First Player exits. My good friends,
Welcome, my good friends.
friends.
As thus: “I know his father and his friends
Come, Gertrude, we’ll call up our wisest friends
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
Abuses me to damn me. I’ll have grounds
And passion in the gods.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
whipped for o’erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
A man that Fortune’s buffets and rewards
Guildenstern, and Lords.
I’ll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
HORATIO His purse is empty already; all ’s golden words
More than in words?
HAMLET Words, words, words.
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
Like to a murd’ring piece, in many places
Heavens make our presence and our practices
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages—
HAMLET What call you the “carriages”?
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
HAMLET It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
changes
torches.
HAMLET A king of shreds and patches—
laid on him by them, in his meed he’s
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
Then up he rose and donned his clothes
O, O, O, O!Dies.
Nor thine on me.Dies.
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.She dies.
Follow my mother.King dies.
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
Th’ extravagant and erring spirit hies
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
LAERTES None but his enemies.
Some little time, so by your companies
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,


encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,

And stand a comma ’tween their amities,
ROSENCRANTZ Both your Majesties
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
next, say “a grave-maker.” The houses he makes
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
That patient merit of th’ unworthy takes,
Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes.
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
ROSENCRANTZ Ay, that they do, my lord—Hercules
Run barefoot up and down, threat’ning the flames
When I to sulf’rous and tormenting flames
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
“Call him a-down-a.”—O, how the wheel becomes
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes
I stay too long. But here my father comes.
HORATIO Look, my lord, it comes.
more, for look where my abridgment comes.
OPHELIA There’s fennel for you, and columbines.
HAMLET A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
But I will delve one yard below their mines

(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones,
If thou canst mutine in a matron’s bones,
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
Popped in between th’ election and my hopes,
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
spheres,
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there’s
And for the day confined to fast in fires
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s
OPHELIA The King rises.
Claudius rises.
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
So is it, if thou knew’st our purposes.
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
As harbingers preceding still the fates
I should have fatted all the region kites
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:

He writes.

Of mighty opposites.
KING O, he is mad, Laertes!
So fast they follow. Your sister’s drowned, Laertes.
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.
Enter King and Laertes.
KING Good Laertes,
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
QUEEN Calmly, good Laertes.
OSRIC You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
Acts little of his will.—Tell me, Laertes,
KING What is the cause, Laertes,
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
OSRIC Of Laertes?
Laertes,
And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes,
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
KING If it be so, Laertes
HAMLET, to Laertes 
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.
You told us of some suit. What is ’t, Laertes?
OSRIC How is ’t, Laertes?
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
be in ’s time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
Of Hamlet’s wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
There’s matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
Into the madness wherein now he raves
To th’ ambassadors of England gives
them, for there be of them that will themselves
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
QUEEN No, nothing but ourselves.
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
After the thing it loves.
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
Had left the flushing in her gallèd eyes,
By their oppressed and fear-surprisèd eyes
Of mine own eyes.
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
eyes.
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
legs.
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
Richer than that which four successive kings
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings—
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
OPHELIA sings 
OPHELIA sings 
OPHELIA sings 
OPHELIA sings 
GRAVEDIGGER sings 
GRAVEDIGGER sings 
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.
And more above, hath his solicitings,
Save me and hover o’er me with your wings,
If with too credent ear you list his songs
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
HAMLET Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
HAMLET He poisons him i’ th’ garden for his estate. His
HAMLET No, believe me, ’tis very cold; the wind is
POLONIUS You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
the King’s pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
HAMLET Why, then, ’tis none to you, for there is
POLONIUS, aside Though this be madness, yet there is

Aside. To my sick soul (as sin’s true nature is),

HAMLET This?
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
HAMLET He that plays the king shall be welcome—his
HAMLET Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
GRAVEDIGGER Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
HORATIO Not from his
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
HORATIO This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
As I do thee.—Something too much of this.—

And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

KING Let’s further think of this,
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
Now out of this—
QUEEN To whom do you speak this?
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
pity that great folk should have count’nance in this
Your loneliness.—We are oft to blame in this
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
We will bestow ourselves. To Ophelia. Read on this
Look here upon this picture and on this,
HAMLET Dost thou think Alexander looked o’ this
POLONIUS Wherefore should you do this?
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
So excellent a king, that was to this
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
HAMLET But where was this?
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
What warlike noise is this?
QUEEN Alack, what noise is this?
HORATIO Why, what a king is this!
KING, to Queen Do you think ’tis this?
that’s the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
To tell us this.
LAERTES Why ask you this?
they ask you what it means, say you this:
KING What dost thou mean by this?
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
is—
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
GRAVEDIGGER You lie out on ’t, sir, and therefore ’tis
Most holy and religious fear it is
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in ’t, yet it is
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
What majesty should be, what duty is,
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
As from the body of contraction plucks
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
HAMLET Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
Where should we have our thanks?
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
QUEEN The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.She drinks.
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
Before mine uncle. I’ll observe his looks;
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
All may be well.He kneels.
Keeps wassail, and the swagg’ring upspring reels;
He falls.
The Queen falls.
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
And in this brainish apprehension kills

He digs up more skulls.

HAMLET, aside These tedious old fools.
As to peace-parted souls.
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
that I have bad dreams.
“Seems,” madam? Nay, it is. I know not “seems.”
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
GRAVEDIGGER He was the first that ever bore arms.
It spreads his arms.
To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my arms
A sister driven into desp’rate terms,
HAMLET Why, e’en so. And now my Lady Worm’s,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
HORATIO No, by no means.
HAMLET Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
what it means.
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
OPHELIA O, help him, you sweet heavens!
Or by some habit that too much o’erleavens
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
about of brains.
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
FORTINBRAS Let four captains
HAMLET Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
About her lank and all o’erteemèd loins
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
Is the main motive of our preparations,
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
Ghost beckons.
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
KING O, for two special reasons,
The fair Ophelia.—Nymph, in thy orisons
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
T’ assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
The tedious day with sleep.Sleeps.
But age with his stealing steps
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
For out o’ doors he went without their helps

music. Look you, these are the stops.
In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups,
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
And let us once again assail your ears,
Pours the poison in his ears.
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
The light and careless livery that it wears
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
three-and-twenty years.
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
That was and is the question of these wars.
A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
recorders!
Enter the Players with recorders.
OSRIC The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.
Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.
Enter Horatio and others.
Enter Laertes with others.
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother’s
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,



HAMLET And do still, by these pickers and stealers.
whispers

Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
But keep a farm and carters.
it! It is the false steward that stole his master’s
HAMLET Do you think I meant country matters?
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
Enter a Messenger with letters.

Come, I will give you way for these your letters

With true-love showers.
She scatters flowers.
Larded all with sweet flowers;
He answers:
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.
Enter the Players.
A flourish for the Players.
HAMLET We shall know by this fellow. The players
this soon.—Good my lord, will you see the players
GUILDENSTERN There are the players.
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
With most miraculous organ. I’ll have these players
fellowship in a cry of players?
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
POLONIUS Come, sirs.
Give first admittance to th’ ambassadors.
it himself. There are no tongues else for ’s
Enter Sailors.
To both your honors.
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
middle of her favors?
The portraiture of his. I’ll court his favors.
hours.
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
You go not till I set you up a glass


O’er this solidity and compound mass
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;

That it might please you to give quiet pass
HAMLET Then came each actor on his ass.
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
So tell him, with th’ occurrents, more and less,
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
Without debatement further, more or less,
QUEEN This is mere madness;
“Mad” call I it, for, to define true madness,
And I the matter will reword, which madness
That I essentially am not in madness,
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
easiness.
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
Answer, and think upon this business.
shall be the end of my business.
She turns to favor and to prettiness.
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
It lifted up its head and did address
Of this his nephew’s purpose, to suppress
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
As one incapable of her own distress
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
Who calls me “villain”? breaks my pate across?
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
He puts Laertes’ hand into Hamlet’s.
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts—
And drive his purpose into these delights.
But I do prophesy th’ election lights
POLONIUS Lights, lights, lights!

And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;

that’s for thoughts.
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
thoughts.
hits.
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
As he is very potent with such spirits,
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
O heavens, is ’t possible a young maid’s wits
GRAVEDIGGER Faith, e’en with losing his wits.
HAMLET Make you a wholesome answer. My wit’s
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.Osric exits.
HAMLET She well instructs me.Lord exits.
Come, for England.He exits.
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.He exits.
He exits.
He exits.
He exits.
He exits.
To a nunnery, go.He exits.
CAPTAIN God be wi’ you, sir.He exits.
He exits.
But that this folly drowns it.He exits.
He exits.
We beg your hearing patiently.He exits.
ladies, good night, good night.She exits.
you.She exits.
The Other Man exits
QUEEN Let her come in.Gentleman exits.
Player Queen exits.
Queen exits.
Francisco exits.
Farewell.Reynaldo exits.
Horatio exits.
Horatio exits.
Leave us.Messenger exits.
LAERTES Farewell.Laertes exits.
Polonius exits.
HAMLET Bid the players make haste.Polonius exits.
Polonius exits.
Polonius exits.
Hamlet exits.
Hamlet exits.
Ghost exits.
Ghost exits.
Ghost exits.
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
Guildenstern and Attendants.
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.
with some Attendants.
King and Queen exit with Attendants.
thousand tenants.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
And even the like precurse of feared events,
Between the pass and fell incensèd points
And there I see such black and grainèd spots
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.
us
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Bring him before us.
ROSENCRANTZ We will haste us.
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
This unprevailing woe and think of us
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
’tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
What is the reason that you use me thus?
It could not move thus.
Have you any further trade with us?
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
KING How long hath she been thus?
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
HAMLET My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
LAERTES, to Claudius 
Cornelius.
Enter Queen and Polonius.
KING, advancing with Polonius 
Polonius.
They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.
Pointing to Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
KING Now, Hamlet, where’s Polonius?
KING Where is Polonius?
Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.
Welcome, Horatio.—Welcome, good Marcellus.
Marcellus?
Stay and speak!—Stop it, Marcellus.
Enter Lucianus.
For your desire to know what is between us,
bounteous.
HAMLET, aside to Horatio Thy state is the more gracious,
You heavenly guards!—What would your gracious
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
GUILDENSTERN Is in his retirement marvelous
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
Of blue Olympus.
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
She is a strumpet. What news?
How now? What news?
and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows.
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
There’s letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.
knows,
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Out of his brows.
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
Speak of it.The cock crows.
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
Look to ’t, I charge you. Come your ways.
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
From our achievements, though performed at
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
HAMLET A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, ’tis no great
GUILDENSTERN The Queen your mother, in most great
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
Had witchcraft in ’t. He grew unto his seat,
I ha ’t!
HAMLET What?
last. Com’st thou to beard me in Denmark?—What,
true. Let me question more in particular. What
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I’ll ha ’t.
Osric to put on his hat.
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,

of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that

POLONIUS, to the King Oh, ho! Do you mark that?
GRAVEDIGGER E’en that.
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
A villain kills my father, and for that,
LAERTES How now, what noise is that?
OPHELIA Do you doubt that?
(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
that)
REYNALDO Ay, my lord, I would know that.
I must to England, you know that.
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
ROSENCRANTZ Believe what?
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
POLONIUS And then, sir, does he this, he does—what
Our purpose may hold there.—But stay, what
certain convocation of politic worms are e’en at
Priam’s slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
HAMLET Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too—at
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i’ th’ throat
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
Whips out his rapier, cries “A rat, a rat,”
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
Is thought-sick at the act.
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
HAMLET Such an act
HAMLET What did you enact?
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
QUEEN Ay me, what act
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,


Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
The leprous distilment, whose effect
That we find out the cause of this effect,

By letters congruing to that effect,
And with such cozenage—is ’t not perfect
’Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
Must give us pause. There’s the respect
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
As will not leave their tinct.
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
To lay our service freely at your feet,
For and a shrouding sheet,
O, methought there—a—was nothing—a—meet.
(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
For such a guest is meet.
For such a guest is meet.
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
And blow them at the moon. O, ’tis most sweet
Methought it was very sweet
Most necessary ’tis that we forget
HORATIO Good my lord, be quiet.
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
And put it in his pocket—
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.
MARCELLUS Lord Hamlet.
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
Hamlet.
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
GENTLEMEN, within Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
That I will speak to thee. I’ll call thee “Hamlet,”
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
Hamlet.
Hamlet,
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
They enter with Hamlet.
You shall not go, my lord.They hold back Hamlet.
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
Hamlet.
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
KING How fares our cousin Hamlet?
HAMLET But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
and more strange return. Hamlet.
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
Speak to her, Hamlet.
KING Thy loving father, Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Was ’t Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
KING What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.

No more, sweet Hamlet!

QUEEN Hamlet! Hamlet!
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
Why, how now, Hamlet?
KING Ay, Hamlet.
But you’ll be secret?
Reads. High and mighty, you shall know I am set
My lord, he’s going to his mother’s closet.
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
POLONIUS Marry, sir, here’s my drift,
Haste me to know ’t, that I, with wings as swift
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
height,
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
That lend a tyrannous and a damnèd light
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
might,”
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
FRANCISCO Give you good night.
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
’Tis now the very witching time of night,
What art thou that usurp’st this time of night,
Delay it not. I’ll have him hence tonight.
Hold you the watch tonight?
HAMLET I will watch tonight.
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
Your skill shall, like a star i’ th’ darkest night,
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
HAMLET Why, right, you are in the right.
KING It falls right.
That ever I was born to set it right!
OTHER “Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
And vanished from our sight.
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
FORTINBRAS Where is this sight?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
And England, if my love thou hold’st at aught
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
POLONIUS Marry, well bethought.
thought,
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
But in our circumstance and course of thought
Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought,
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
Subscribed it, gave ’t th’ impression, placed it
HAMLET I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.
REYNALDO My lord, I did intend it.
HAMLET So be it.
of very liberal conceit.
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
HORATIO Never believe it.
HAMLET Do not believe it.
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
O, throw away the worser part of it,
To let you know of it.
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.
We would not understand what was most fit,
Lord Such-a-one’s horse when he went to beg it,
And will not wrong it.
Than your particular demands will touch it.
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
OSRIC A hit, a very palpable hit.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
But do not go with it.
It beckons you to go away with it
it?
HAMLET No, you will reveal it.
Of Hamlet’s transformation, so call it,
all “impawned,” as you call it?
Good my lord, tell it.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
Did you not speak to it?
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
But truly I do fear it.
FORTINBRAS Let us haste to hear it
GHOST I am thy father’s spirit,
The potent poison quite o’ercrows my spirit.
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
HAMLET Whose was it?
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
To Queen. Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
And I beseech you instantly to visit
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
Heaven will direct it.
HAMLET I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
GRAVEDIGGER Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
It waves me forth again. I’ll follow it.
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.
All but the King exit.
FORTINBRAS Go softly on.All but the Captain exit.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.
and Lords exit.
Players exit.
Players exit.
HAMLET He will stay till you come.Attendants exit.
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.
Ghost and Hamlet exit.
All but Hamlet exit.
Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.
All but Hamlet exit.
All but Hamlet exit.
ROSENCRANTZ Ay, my lord.They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
They exit.
KING We will try it.
KING I do not think ’t.
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
Of general assault.
OPHELIA Will he tell us what this show meant?
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
OSRIC I know you are not ignorant—
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
Th’ associates tend, and everything is bent
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
And call it accident.

I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
HORATIO I knew you must be edified by the margent

Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
How in my words somever she be shent,
Where we shall find him most convenient.
OPHELIA I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
HAMLET Sir, I lack advancement.
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
HAMLET Judgment!
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
Is not to stir without great argument,
This grave shall have a living monument.
HAMLET ’Tis e’en so. The hand of little employment
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Which is not tomb enough and continent
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
are spent.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
HAMLET Anything but to th’ purpose. You were sent
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
Against the which a moiety competent
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
To give it due content.
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Of thinking too precisely on th’ event
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
HAMLET Who is to be buried in ’t?
offense in ’t?
That has no relish of salvation in ’t—
That is but scratched withal. I’ll touch my point
lines, which I would set down and insert in ’t,
HAMLET I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in ’t.
Indeed, without an oath, I’ll make an end on ’t:
ache to think on ’t.
It hath the primal eldest curse upon ’t,
From fashion of himself. What think you on ’t?
What think you on ’t?
I have sworn ’t.
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
No reck’ning made, but sent to my account
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
GRAVEDIGGER To ’t.
LAERTES I will do ’t,
hobby-horse is forgot.”
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
That thou so many princes at a shot
Drum, trumpets, and shot.
OSRIC I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Cries “cuckold” to my father, brands the harlot
A brother’s murder. Pray can I not,
LAERTES O, fear me not.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
HORATIO/MARCELLUS  My lord, we will not.
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
GUILDENSTERN My lord, I cannot.
GUILDENSTERN Believe me, I cannot.
HAMLET Sir, I cannot.
Shall we to th’ court? For, by my fay, I cannot
Would make them capable. To the Ghost. Do not
HORATIO Let them come in. Gentleman exits. I do not
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
HAMLET The body is with the King, but the King is not
HAMLET Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
GUILDENSTERN Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
Looking before and after, gave us not
HAMLET Nay, that follows not.
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
might it not?
might it not?
relish of it. I loved you not.
could you not?
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
In what particular thought to work I know not,
HAMLET Nay, I know not.
ROSENCRANTZ No, indeed are they not.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
ALL My lord, from head to foot.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
HAMLET How long will a man lie i’ th’ earth ere he rot?
GRAVEDIGGER Of all the days i’ th’ year, I came to ’t
Young men will do ’t, if they come to ’t;
friend, look to ’t.
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We’ll e’en to ’t
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to ’t.
As by lot, God wot
GHOST I find thee apt;
A face without a heart?
The head is not more native to the heart,



In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart,
heart,

This something-settled matter in his heart,
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
It warms the very sickness in my heart
HAMLET Nay, but swear ’t.
The harlot’s cheek beautied with plast’ring art
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
We’ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
mother’s admiration? Impart.
Thy knotted and combinèd locks to part,
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
QUEEN More matter with less art.
desert.
Lest with this piteous action you convert
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
To make it truster of your own report
And gave you such a masterly report
And with a look so piteous in purport
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
That she should lock herself from his resort,
As it is common for the younger sort
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th’ Hyrcanian beast—
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Well said, old mole. Canst work i’ th’ earth so fast?—
To Laertes. Strengthen your patience in our last
By laborsome petition, and at last
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
To serve in such a difference. What devil was ’t
LAERTES A Norman was ’t?
A couch for luxury and damnèd incest.
liest.
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
the author of affection, but called it an honest
grown honest.
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
HAMLET Ha, ha, are you honest?
PLAYER QUEEN O, confound the rest!
GRAVEDIGGER One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
Give me one poor request.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
HAMLET Ay, marry, is ’t,
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
Enter Ghost.
Enter Ghost.
Enter Ghost.
Enter Ghost.
HAMLET Alas, poor ghost!
lost,
And so have I a noble father lost,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
HORATIO That is most
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
None wed the second but who killed the first.
th’ worst.
In second husband let me be accurst.
A touch, a touch. I do confess ’t.
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
For good Polonius’ death, and we have done but
baker’s daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
shall see anon. ’Tis a knavish piece of work, but
would dozy th’ arithmetic of memory, and yet but
out
And a most instant tetter barked about,
their trial, the bubbles are out.
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
Where is this king?—Sirs, stand you all without.
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
HAMLET They are sheep and calves which seek out
And either … the devil or throw him out
Make you to ravel all this matter out
HAMLET My fate cries out
By indirections find directions out.
if philosophy could find it out.
Treachery! Seek it out.
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
Not when I saw ’t.
most best, believe it. Adieu.
I am dead, Horatio.—Wretched queen, adieu.—
Gonzago is the duke’s name, his wife Baptista. You
I thank you. Keep the door. Followers exit. O, thou
’Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou

I’ll rant as well as thou.

For husband shalt thou—
hadst thou!
“Thus didst thou.”
GRAVEDIGGER What, art a heathen? How dost thou
HAMLET My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
So, proceed you.
you?
HORATIO It would have much amazed you.
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
OPHELIA You must sing “A-down a-down”—and you
HAMLET No, nor mine now. To Polonius. My lord, you
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
Ophelia, walk you here.—Gracious, so please you,
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
My too much changèd son.—Go, some of you,
I will take my leave of you.
KING He made confession of you
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
HORATIO I beseech you.
HAMLET I do beseech you.
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.—
with you.
Sir, my good friend. I’ll change that name with you.
And he to England shall along with you.
POLONIUS My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you?
QUEEN Alas, how is ’t with you,
Your sudden coming-o’er, to play with you.
Had it th’ ability of life to thank you.
HAMLET Very well. Follow that lord—and look you
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you—
It is an honest ghost—that let me tell you.
not you ashamed to show, he’ll not shame to tell you
POLONIUS My lord, I have news to tell you.
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
But let me hear from you.
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
HAMLET And fixed his eyes upon you?
ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN We’ll wait upon you.
What I have said to you.
What is ’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
With all my love I do commend me to you,
from me to you.
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
May do t’ express his love and friending to you,
This marvel to you.
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
you.
letters for you.
(Or then, or then, with such or such), “and as you
you,
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
I’ll visit you.
You, as your business and desire shall point you
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
HAMLET I pray you.
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
HAMLET How purposed, sir, I pray you?
Armed, say you?
ROSENCRANTZ, to Guildenstern What say you?
Come. They play. Another hit. What say you?
KING Who shall stay you?
QUEEN I shall obey you.
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
Should patch a wall t’ expel the winter’s flaw!
OTHER But is this law?
GRAVEDIGGER Ay, marry, is ’t—crowner’s ’quest law.
QUEEN I’ll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
recorder and turns to Guildenstern. To withdraw
They withdraw.
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
Will not debate the question of this straw.
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
High on a stage be placed to the view,
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
strew
POLONIUS Indeed, that’s out of the air. Aside. How
HAMLET A dream itself is but a shadow.
and light a quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.
And I a maid at your window,
But I have that within which passes show,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
A rhapsody of words! Heaven’s face does glow
Of these dilated articles allow.
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.—
Therefore, let’s follow.
HAMLET I am constant to my purposes. They follow
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
KING Not that I know.
And tell you what I know.
How should I your true love know
Let’s do ’t, I pray, and I this morning know
But mad in craft. ’Twere good you let him know,
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
OPHELIA My lord, I do not know,
It did me yeoman’s service. Wilt thou know
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
and then, you know,
My lord, I’ll hit him now.
HAMLET What’s the matter now?
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now

HAMLET What hour now?

Sings.White his shroud as the mountain snow—
His beard was as white as snow,
now.
HAMLET If she should break it now!
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
Videlicet, a brothel—or so forth. See you now
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
LAERTES Have at you now!
And lose the name of action.—Soft you now,
Even here between the chaste unsmirchèd brow
And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow,
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Does by their own insinuation grow.
Hazard so near ’s as doth hourly grow
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
would it might be “hangers” till then. But on. Six
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
How does your Honor for this many a day?
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
And do such bitter business as the day
And it must follow, as the night the day,

players; mark it.—You say right, sir, a Monday
From the first corse till he that died today,
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today

I saw him yesterday,” or “th’ other day”
Sings.Tomorrow is Saint Valentine’s day,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
LAERTES Say you so? Come on.Play.
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay,
HAMLET Follow him, friends. We’ll hear a play
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
The hart ungallèd play.
play.
KING What do you call the play?
POLONIUS Give o’er the play.
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
play.
Prepare to play.
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.
HAMLET Madam, how like you this play?
HAMLET O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
For they are actions that a man might play;
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
HAMLET I do not well understand that. Will you play
LAERTES Come, my lord.They play.
And will this brothers’ wager frankly play.—
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
’Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
HAMLET Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
OPHELIA Madam, I wish it may.
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
I will go pray.
O, say!
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
say,
you say—
played once i’ th’ university, you say?
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
GRAVEDIGGER Very strangely, they say.
KING Give me some light. Away!
Thus runs the world away.
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
KING O Gertrude, come away!
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away,
BARNARDO See, it stalks away.
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
HAMLET Do the boys carry it away?
OSRIC Nothing neither way.
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
Here in the lobby.
the stairs into the lobby.
come by and by.
I dare not drink yet, madam—by and by.
HAMLET Then I will come to my mother by and by.
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
HAMLET How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
LORD My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
Here stooping to your clemency,
That he is open to incontinency;
HAMLET Well, God-a-mercy.
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
MARCELLUS We have sworn, my lord, already.
Thou knowest already.
calf there.—Be the players ready?
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
One word more, good lady.
whose lungs are tickle o’ th’ sear, and the lady
Sings.He is dead and gone, lady,
HAMLET How is it with you, lady?
KING How do you, pretty lady?
For us and for our tragedy,
That, opened, lies within our remedy.
For if the King like not the comedy,
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
All my smooth body.
And makes each petty arture in this body
With which she followed my poor father’s body,
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
GUILDENSTERN But we both obey,
halt for ’t. What players are they?
And how, and who, what means, and where they
Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be an if they
This warlike volley.
HAMLET Why,
HAMLET Why,
HAMLET Why?
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
HAMLET I embrace it freely
safely,
HAMLET How “strangely”?
Th’ oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely,
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
Dost know this waterfly?
HAMLET What, looked he frowningly?
drowned herself wittingly.
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly—
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
Yes, faith, heartily.
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
HAMLET “The Mousetrap.” Marry, how? Tropically.
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
tongue? You will to ’t, sir, really.
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
greenly
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply.
Most free in his reply.
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
You do not understand yourself so clearly
northerly.
love is too unmannerly.
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
Most constantly.
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
PLAYER I hope we have reformed that indifferently
and presently.
POLONIUS And the Queen too, and that presently.
Been struck so to the soul that presently
quaintly
to see thee well.—Welcome, good friends.—O my
this. I’ll speak to him again.—What do you read, my
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
GUILDENSTERN O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
Directly seasons him his enemy.
His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy.
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
some frame and start not so wildly from my
ROSENCRANTZ My lord, there was no such stuff in my
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
And hath abatements and delays as many
GUILDENSTERN But these cannot I command to any
truepenny?
Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
Have we (as ’twere with a defeated joy,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
The violence of either grief or joy
Sings. For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
OSRIC The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
As England was his faithful tributary,
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
When in your motion you are hot and dry
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.
And our vain blows malicious mockery.

all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.

HAMLET God’s bodykins, man, much better! Use every
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
He likewise gives a frock or livery
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
ROSENCRANTZ Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
And these few precepts in thy memory
Yea, from the table of my memory
HAMLET Sir, a whole history.
That are so fortified against our story,
To tell my story.
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
At “closes in the consequence”—ay, marry—
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
Of man and country—

A station like the herald Mercury
With this regard their currents turn awry

To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
Is not this something more than fantasy?
Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy
HAMLET Ecstasy?
This bodiless creation ecstasy
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
Than to entreaty.
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
delight in, the tragedians of the city.
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
In neither aught, or in extremity.
From me, whose love was of that dignity
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.
Passing through nature to eternity.
To his unmastered importunity.
That he’s mad, ’tis true; ’tis true ’tis pity,
Sings.By Gis and by Saint Charity,
And women’s fear and love hold quantity,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
If you desire to know the certainty
To youth and liberty.
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
Thy natural magic and dire property
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
To give th’ assay of arms against your Majesty.
’twere—I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
than with honesty?
HAMLET That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
proverb is something musty.
HAMLET How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
Over the nasty sty!
should admit no discourse to your beauty.
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
And we did think it writ down in our duty
In that and all things will we show our duty.
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.
Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
Enter Rosencrantz.
HAMLET Buzz, buzz.



Begin of unchanged text:


MARCELLUS And liegemen to the Dane.
FRANCISCO Give you good night.
MARCELLUS 
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
you?
FRANCISCO 
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
Francisco exits.
MARCELLUS Holla, Barnardo.
BARNARDO Say, what, is Horatio there?
HORATIO A piece of him.
BARNARDO 
Welcome, Horatio.—Welcome, good Marcellus.
HORATIO 
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
BARNARDO I have seen nothing.
MARCELLUS 
Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
That, if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
HORATIO 
Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.
BARNARDO Sit down awhile,
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our story,
What we have two nights seen.
HORATIO Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
BARNARDO Last night of all,
When yond same star that’s westward from the pole
Had made his course t’ illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
The bell then beating one—
Enter Ghost.

MARCELLUS 
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.
BARNARDO 
In the same figure like the King that’s dead.
MARCELLUS, to Horatio 
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
BARNARDO 
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
HORATIO 
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
BARNARDO 
It would be spoke to.
MARCELLUS Speak to it, Horatio.
HORATIO 
What art thou that usurp’st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
speak.
MARCELLUS 
It is offended.
BARNARDO See, it stalks away.
HORATIO 
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
Ghost exits.
MARCELLUS ’Tis gone and will not answer.
BARNARDO 
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on ’t?
HORATIO 
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.
MARCELLUS Is it not like the King?
HORATIO As thou art to thyself.
Such was the very armor he had on
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
’Tis strange.
MARCELLUS 
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
HORATIO 
In what particular thought to work I know not,
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
MARCELLUS 
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And foreign mart for implements of war,
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Who is ’t that can inform me?
HORATIO That can I.
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Against the which a moiety competent
Was gagèd by our king, which had returned
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
And carriage of the article designed,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimprovèd mettle hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
For food and diet to some enterprise
That hath a stomach in ’t; which is no other
(As it doth well appear unto our state)
But to recover of us, by strong hand
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
BARNARDO 
I think it be no other but e’en so.
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armèd through our watch so like the king
That was and is the question of these wars.
HORATIO 
A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of feared events,
As harbingers preceding still the fates
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Unto our climatures and countrymen.

Enter Ghost.

But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
I’ll cross it though it blast me.—Stay, illusion!
It spreads his arms.
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
Speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country’s fate,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
O, speak!
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
Speak of it.The cock crows.
Stay and speak!—Stop it, Marcellus.
MARCELLUS 
Shall I strike it with my partisan?
HORATIO Do, if it will not stand.
BARNARDO ’Tis here.
HORATIO ’Tis here.
Ghost exits.
MARCELLUS ’Tis gone.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To offer it the show of violence,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
BARNARDO 
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
HORATIO 
And then it started like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Th’ extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine, and of the truth herein
This present object made probation.
MARCELLUS 
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes
Wherein our Savior’s birth is celebrated,
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
HORATIO 
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
MARCELLUS 
Let’s do ’t, I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most convenient.
They exit.



Scene 2
Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
Cornelius.

KING 
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Th’ imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we (as ’twere with a defeated joy,
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Colleaguèd with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
To our most valiant brother—so much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Of this his nephew’s purpose, to suppress
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
The lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King more than the scope
Of these dilated articles allow.
Giving them a paper.
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND 
In that and all things will we show our duty.
KING 
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.
And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you?
You told us of some suit. What is ’t, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
LAERTES My dread lord,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
KING 
Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?
POLONIUS 
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
By laborsome petition, and at last
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
KING 
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.—
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son—
HAMLET, aside 
A little more than kin and less than kind.
KING 
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
HAMLET 
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.
QUEEN 
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not forever with thy vailèd lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know’st ’tis common; all that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.
HAMLET 
Ay, madam, it is common.
QUEEN If it be,
Why seems it so particular with thee?
HAMLET 
“Seems,” madam? Nay, it is. I know not “seems.”
’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
That can denote me truly. These indeed “seem,”
For they are actions that a man might play;
But I have that within which passes show,
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
KING 
’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your father.
But you must know your father lost a father,
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation for some term
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
In obstinate condolement is a course
Of impious stubbornness. ’Tis unmanly grief.
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
An understanding simple and unschooled.
For what we know must be and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Take it to heart? Fie, ’tis a fault to heaven,
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first corse till he that died today,
“This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth
This unprevailing woe and think of us
As of a father; for let the world take note,
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desire,
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
QUEEN 
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.
HAMLET 
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
KING 
Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply.
Be as ourself in Denmark.—Madam, come.
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the King’s rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.
HAMLET 
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
His canon ’gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on ’t, ah fie! ’Tis an unweeded garden
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
But two months dead—nay, not so much, not two.
So excellent a king, that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
(Let me not think on ’t; frailty, thy name is woman!),
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she followed my poor father’s body,
Like Niobe, all tears—why she, even she
(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
uncle,
My father’s brother, but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her gallèd eyes,
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.

HORATIO Hail to your Lordship.
HAMLET I am glad to see you well.
Horatio—or I do forget myself!
HORATIO 
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
HAMLET 
Sir, my good friend. I’ll change that name with you.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?—
Marcellus?
MARCELLUS My good lord.
HAMLET 
I am very glad to see you. To Barnardo. Good
even, sir.—
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
HORATIO 
A truant disposition, good my lord.
HAMLET 
I would not hear your enemy say so,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
We’ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
HORATIO 
My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.
HAMLET 
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
I think it was to see my mother’s wedding.
HORATIO 
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
HAMLET 
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
My father—methinks I see my father.
HORATIO 
Where, my lord?
HAMLET In my mind’s eye, Horatio.
HORATIO 
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
HAMLET 
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.
HORATIO 
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
HAMLET Saw who?
HORATIO 
My lord, the King your father.
HAMLET The King my father?
HORATIO 
Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
This marvel to you.
HAMLET For God’s love, let me hear!
HORATIO 
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Armed at point exactly, cap-à-pie,
Appears before them and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
By their oppressed and fear-surprisèd eyes
Within his truncheon’s length, whilst they, distilled
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
These hands are not more like.
HAMLET But where was this?
MARCELLUS 
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
HAMLET 
Did you not speak to it?
HORATIO My lord, I did,
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
It lifted up its head and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And vanished from our sight.
HAMLET ’Tis very strange.
HORATIO 
As I do live, my honored lord, ’tis true.
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.
HAMLET Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch tonight?
ALL We do, my lord.
HAMLET 
Armed, say you?
ALL Armed, my lord.
HAMLET From top to toe?
ALL My lord, from head to foot.
HAMLET Then saw you not his face?
HORATIO 
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.
HAMLET What, looked he frowningly?
HORATIO 
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
HAMLET Pale or red?
HORATIO 
Nay, very pale.
HAMLET And fixed his eyes upon you?
HORATIO 
Most constantly.
HAMLET I would I had been there.
HORATIO It would have much amazed you.
HAMLET Very like. Stayed it long?
HORATIO 
While one with moderate haste might tell a
hundred.
BARNARDO/MARCELLUS Longer, longer.
HORATIO 
Not when I saw ’t.
HAMLET His beard was grizzled, no?
HORATIO 
It was as I have seen it in his life,
A sable silvered.
HAMLET I will watch tonight.
Perchance ’twill walk again.
HORATIO I warrant it will.
HAMLET 
If it assume my noble father’s person,
I’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
Upon the platform, ’twixt eleven and twelve,
I’ll visit you.
ALL Our duty to your Honor.
HAMLET 
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
All but Hamlet exit.
My father’s spirit—in arms! All is not well.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s
eyes.
He exits.


Scene 3
Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.

LAERTES 
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.
OPHELIA Do you doubt that?
LAERTES 
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
No more.
OPHELIA No more but so?
LAERTES Think it no more.
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
The inward service of the mind and soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
For he himself is subject to his birth.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
The safety and the health of this whole state.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
As he in his particular act and place
May give his saying deed, which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
If with too credent ear you list his songs
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
To his unmastered importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes.
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
OPHELIA 
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
And recks not his own rede.
LAERTES O, fear me not.

Enter Polonius.

I stay too long. But here my father comes.
A double blessing is a double grace.
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
POLONIUS 
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
thee.
And these few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Bear ’t that th’ opposèd may beware of thee.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
And they in France of the best rank and station
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all: to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.
LAERTES 
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
POLONIUS 
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.
LAERTES 
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
What I have said to you.
OPHELIA ’Tis in my memory locked,
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
LAERTES Farewell.Laertes exits.
POLONIUS 
What is ’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
OPHELIA 
So please you, something touching the Lord
Hamlet.
POLONIUS Marry, well bethought.
’Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Have of your audience been most free and
bounteous.
If it be so (as so ’tis put on me,
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
You do not understand yourself so clearly
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
OPHELIA 
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Of his affection to me.
POLONIUS 
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his “tenders,” as you call them?
OPHELIA 
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
POLONIUS 
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Running it thus) you’ll tender me a fool.
OPHELIA 
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
In honorable fashion—
POLONIUS 
Ay, “fashion” you may call it. Go to, go to!
OPHELIA 
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
POLONIUS 
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walk
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
Have you so slander any moment leisure
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Look to ’t, I charge you. Come your ways.
OPHELIA I shall obey, my lord.
They exit.


Scene 4
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.

HAMLET 
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
HORATIO 
It is a nipping and an eager air.
HAMLET What hour now?
HORATIO I think it lacks of twelve.
MARCELLUS No, it is struck.
HORATIO 
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.
What does this mean, my lord?
HAMLET 
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassail, and the swagg’ring upspring reels;
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge.
HORATIO Is it a custom?
HAMLET Ay, marry, is ’t,
But, to my mind, though I am native here
And to the manner born, it is a custom
More honored in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
From our achievements, though performed at
height,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
So oft it chances in particular men
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
By the o’ergrowth of some complexion
(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
Or by some habit that too much o’erleavens
The form of plausive manners—that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Being nature’s livery or fortune’s star,
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
As infinite as man may undergo,
Shall in the general censure take corruption
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
To his own scandal.

Enter Ghost.

HORATIO Look, my lord, it comes.
HAMLET 
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
hell,
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou com’st in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. I’ll call thee “Hamlet,”
“King,” “Father,” “Royal Dane.” O, answer me!
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Why thy canonized bones, hearsèd in death,
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
Ghost beckons.
HORATIO 
It beckons you to go away with it
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone.
MARCELLUS Look with what courteous action
It waves you to a more removèd ground.
But do not go with it.
HORATIO No, by no means.
HAMLET 
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.
HORATIO 
Do not, my lord.
HAMLET Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pin’s fee.
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again. I’ll follow it.
HORATIO 
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o’er his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
And hears it roar beneath.
HAMLET 
It waves me still.—Go on, I’ll follow thee.
MARCELLUS 
You shall not go, my lord.They hold back Hamlet.
HAMLET Hold off your hands.
HORATIO 
Be ruled. You shall not go.
HAMLET My fate cries out
And makes each petty arture in this body
As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me!
I say, away!—Go on. I’ll follow thee.
Ghost and Hamlet exit.
HORATIO 
He waxes desperate with imagination.
MARCELLUS 
Let’s follow. ’Tis not fit thus to obey him.
HORATIO 
Have after. To what issue will this come?
MARCELLUS 
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
HORATIO 
Heaven will direct it.
MARCELLUS Nay, let’s follow him.
They exit.


Scene 5
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.

HAMLET 
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I’ll go no
further.
GHOST 
Mark me.
HAMLET I will.
GHOST My hour is almost come
When I to sulf’rous and tormenting flames
Must render up myself.
HAMLET Alas, poor ghost!
GHOST 
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.
HAMLET Speak. I am bound to hear.
GHOST 
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
HAMLET What?
GHOST I am thy father’s spirit,
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
And for the day confined to fast in fires
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
spheres,
Thy knotted and combinèd locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love—
HAMLET O God!
GHOST 
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
HAMLET Murder?
GHOST 
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
HAMLET 
Haste me to know ’t, that I, with wings as swift
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
May sweep to my revenge.
GHOST I find thee apt;
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
Is by a forgèd process of my death
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
The serpent that did sting thy father’s life
Now wears his crown.
HAMLET O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!
GHOST 
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts—
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
From me, whose love was of that dignity
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
To those of mine.
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage.
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
My custom always of the afternoon,
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
With juice of cursèd hebona in a vial
And in the porches of my ears did pour
The leprous distilment, whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
And a most instant tetter barked about,
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
All my smooth body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
No reck’ning made, but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head.
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
A couch for luxury and damnèd incest.
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.He exits.
HAMLET 
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Yea, from the table of my memory
I’ll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
That youth and observation copied there,
And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling, damnèd villain!
My tables—meet it is I set it down
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
He writes.
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
It is “adieu, adieu, remember me.”
I have sworn ’t.

Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

HORATIO My lord, my lord!
MARCELLUS Lord Hamlet.
HORATIO Heavens secure him!
HAMLET So be it.
MARCELLUS Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
HAMLET Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!
MARCELLUS 
How is ’t, my noble lord?
HORATIO What news, my lord?
HAMLET O, wonderful!
HORATIO 
Good my lord, tell it.
HAMLET No, you will reveal it.
HORATIO 
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
MARCELLUS Nor I, my lord.
HAMLET 
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
it?
But you’ll be secret?
HORATIO/MARCELLUS  Ay, by heaven, my lord.
HAMLET 
There’s never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But he’s an arrant knave.
HORATIO 
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
To tell us this.
HAMLET Why, right, you are in the right.
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
You, as your business and desire shall point you
(For every man hath business and desire,
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
I will go pray.
HORATIO 
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
HAMLET 
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
Yes, faith, heartily.
HORATIO There’s no offense, my lord.
HAMLET 
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
It is an honest ghost—that let me tell you.
For your desire to know what is between us,
O’ermaster ’t as you may. And now, good friends,
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.
HORATIO What is ’t, my lord? We will.
HAMLET 
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
HORATIO/MARCELLUS  My lord, we will not.
HAMLET Nay, but swear ’t.
HORATIO In faith, my lord, not I.
MARCELLUS Nor I, my lord, in faith.
HAMLET 
Upon my sword.
MARCELLUS We have sworn, my lord, already.
HAMLET Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
GHOST cries under the stage Swear.
HAMLET 
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
truepenny?
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.
HORATIO Propose the oath, my lord.
HAMLET 
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Swear by my sword.
GHOST, beneath Swear.
HAMLET 
Hic et ubique? Then we’ll shift our ground.
Come hither, gentlemen,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
Swear by my sword
Never to speak of this that you have heard.
GHOST, beneath Swear by his sword.
HAMLET 
Well said, old mole. Canst work i’ th’ earth so fast?—
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
HORATIO 
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.
HAMLET 
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
How strange or odd some’er I bear myself
(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an antic disposition on)
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could an if we
would,”
Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be an if they
might,”
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
That you know aught of me—this do swear,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
GHOST, beneath Swear.
HAMLET 
Rest, rest, perturbèd spirit.—So, gentlemen,
With all my love I do commend me to you,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
May do t’ express his love and friending to you,
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
The time is out of joint. O cursèd spite
That ever I was born to set it right!
Nay, come, let’s go together.
They exit.


ACT 2
Scene 1
Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.

POLONIUS 
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
REYNALDO I will, my lord.
POLONIUS 
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Of his behavior.
REYNALDO My lord, I did intend it.
POLONIUS 
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means, and where they
keep,
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him,
As thus: “I know his father and his friends
And, in part, him.” Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
REYNALDO Ay, very well, my lord.
POLONIUS 
“And, in part, him, but,” you may say, “not well.
But if ’t be he I mean, he’s very wild,
Addicted so and so.” And there put on him
What forgeries you please—marry, none so rank
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.
REYNALDO As gaming, my lord.
POLONIUS Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Quarreling, drabbing—you may go so far.
REYNALDO My lord, that would dishonor him.
POLONIUS 
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him
That he is open to incontinency;
That’s not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
quaintly
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
A savageness in unreclaimèd blood,
Of general assault.
REYNALDO But, my good lord—
POLONIUS Wherefore should you do this?
REYNALDO Ay, my lord, I would know that.
POLONIUS Marry, sir, here’s my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
As ’twere a thing a little soiled i’ th’ working,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
sound,
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
“Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,”
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country—
REYNALDO Very good, my lord.
POLONIUS And then, sir, does he this, he does—what
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
something. Where did I leave?
REYNALDO At “closes in the consequence,” at “friend,
or so,” and “gentleman.”
POLONIUS 
At “closes in the consequence”—ay, marry—
He closes thus: “I know the gentleman.
I saw him yesterday,” or “th’ other day”
(Or then, or then, with such or such), “and as you
say,
There was he gaming, there o’ertook in ’s rouse,
There falling out at tennis”; or perchance
“I saw him enter such a house of sale”—
Videlicet, a brothel—or so forth. See you now
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
By indirections find directions out.
So by my former lecture and advice
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
REYNALDO 
My lord, I have.
POLONIUS God be wi’ you. Fare you well.
REYNALDO Good my lord.
POLONIUS 
Observe his inclination in yourself.
REYNALDO I shall, my lord.
POLONIUS And let him ply his music.
REYNALDO Well, my lord.
POLONIUS 
Farewell.Reynaldo exits.

Enter Ophelia.

How now, Ophelia, what’s the matter?
OPHELIA 
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
POLONIUS With what, i’ th’ name of God?
OPHELIA 
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Ungartered, and down-gyvèd to his ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosèd out of hell
To speak of horrors—he comes before me.
POLONIUS 
Mad for thy love?
OPHELIA My lord, I do not know,
But truly I do fear it.
POLONIUS What said he?
OPHELIA 
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out o’ doors he went without their helps
And to the last bended their light on me.
POLONIUS 
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Whose violent property fordoes itself
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
As oft as any passions under heaven
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
OPHELIA 
No, my good lord, but as you did command
I did repel his letters and denied
His access to me.
POLONIUS That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
move
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Come.
They exit.


Scene 2
Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern and Attendants.

KING 
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlet’s transformation, so call it,
Sith nor th’ exterior nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him
So much from th’ understanding of himself
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
That, being of so young days brought up with him
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Some little time, so by your companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
That, opened, lies within our remedy.
QUEEN 
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
And sure I am two men there is not living
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
As to expend your time with us awhile
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a king’s remembrance.
ROSENCRANTZ Both your Majesties
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Than to entreaty.
GUILDENSTERN But we both obey,
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
To lay our service freely at your feet,
To be commanded.
KING 
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
QUEEN 
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changèd son.—Go, some of you,
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
GUILDENSTERN 
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him!
QUEEN Ay, amen!
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
with some Attendants.

Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS 
Th’ ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Are joyfully returned.
KING 
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
POLONIUS 
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath used to do, that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.
KING 
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
POLONIUS 
Give first admittance to th’ ambassadors.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
KING 
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
Polonius exits.
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
The head and source of all your son’s distemper.
QUEEN 
I doubt it is no other but the main—
His father’s death and our o’erhasty marriage.
KING 
Well, we shall sift him.

Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Polonius.

Welcome, my good friends.
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
VOLTEMAND 
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His nephew’s levies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack,
But, better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
To give th’ assay of arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
fee
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
So levied as before, against the Polack,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
He gives a paper.
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance
As therein are set down.
KING It likes us well,
And, at our more considered time, we’ll read,
Answer, and think upon this business.
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Go to your rest. At night we’ll feast together.
Most welcome home!
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.
POLONIUS This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
“Mad” call I it, for, to define true madness,
What is ’t but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.
QUEEN More matter with less art.
POLONIUS 
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he’s mad, ’tis true; ’tis true ’tis pity,
And pity ’tis ’tis true—a foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Perpend.
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
He reads. To the celestial, and my soul’s idol, the
most beautified Ophelia—
That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase; “beautified” is a
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: He reads.
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.—
QUEEN Came this from Hamlet to her?
POLONIUS 
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
He reads the letter.
Doubt thou the stars are fire,
Doubt that the sun doth move,
Doubt truth to be a liar,
But never doubt I love.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
most best, believe it. Adieu.
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
And more above, hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear.
KING But how hath she received his love?
POLONIUS What do you think of me?
KING 
As of a man faithful and honorable.
POLONIUS 
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had played the desk or table-book
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
“Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
This must not be.” And then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves
And all we mourn for.
KING, to Queen Do you think ’tis this?
QUEEN It may be, very like.
POLONIUS 
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
that)
That I have positively said “’Tis so,”
When it proved otherwise?
KING Not that I know.
POLONIUS 
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
Within the center.
KING How may we try it further?
POLONIUS 
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Here in the lobby.
QUEEN So he does indeed.
POLONIUS 
At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him.
To the King. Be you and I behind an arras then.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fall’n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.
KING We will try it.

Enter Hamlet reading on a book.

QUEEN 
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
reading.
POLONIUS 
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
I’ll board him presently. O, give me leave.
King and Queen exit with Attendants.
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
HAMLET Well, God-a-mercy.
POLONIUS Do you know me, my lord?
HAMLET Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
POLONIUS Not I, my lord.
HAMLET Then I would you were so honest a man.
POLONIUS Honest, my lord?
HAMLET Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
be one man picked out of ten thousand.
POLONIUS That’s very true, my lord.
HAMLET For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
dog, being a good kissing carrion—Have you a
daughter?
POLONIUS I have, my lord.
HAMLET Let her not walk i’ th’ sun. Conception is a
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
friend, look to ’t.
POLONIUS, aside How say you by that? Still harping on
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
this. I’ll speak to him again.—What do you read, my
lord?
HAMLET Words, words, words.
POLONIUS What is the matter, my lord?
HAMLET Between who?
POLONIUS I mean the matter that you read, my lord.
HAMLET Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
you could go backward.
POLONIUS, aside Though this be madness, yet there is
method in ’t.—Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
HAMLET Into my grave?
POLONIUS Indeed, that’s out of the air. Aside. How
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
that often madness hits on, which reason and
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
meeting between him and my daughter.—My lord,
I will take my leave of you.
HAMLET You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
will more willingly part withal—except my life,
except my life, except my life.
POLONIUS Fare you well, my lord.
HAMLET, aside These tedious old fools.

Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.

POLONIUS You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
ROSENCRANTZ, to Polonius God save you, sir.
Polonius exits.
GUILDENSTERN My honored lord.
ROSENCRANTZ My most dear lord.
HAMLET My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
you both?
ROSENCRANTZ 
As the indifferent children of the earth.
GUILDENSTERN 
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
On Fortune’s cap, we are not the very button.
HAMLET Nor the soles of her shoe?
ROSENCRANTZ Neither, my lord.
HAMLET Then you live about her waist, or in the
middle of her favors?
GUILDENSTERN Faith, her privates we.
HAMLET In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
She is a strumpet. What news?
ROSENCRANTZ None, my lord, but that the world’s
grown honest.
HAMLET Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
true. Let me question more in particular. What
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?
GUILDENSTERN Prison, my lord?
HAMLET Denmark’s a prison.
ROSENCRANTZ Then is the world one.
HAMLET A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o’
th’ worst.
ROSENCRANTZ We think not so, my lord.
HAMLET Why, then, ’tis none to you, for there is
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
so. To me, it is a prison.
ROSENCRANTZ Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
’Tis too narrow for your mind.
HAMLET O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
that I have bad dreams.
GUILDENSTERN Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
the shadow of a dream.
HAMLET A dream itself is but a shadow.
ROSENCRANTZ Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
and light a quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.
HAMLET Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows.
Shall we to th’ court? For, by my fay, I cannot
reason.
ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN We’ll wait upon you.
HAMLET No such matter. I will not sort you with the
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore?
ROSENCRANTZ To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
HAMLET Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
speak.
GUILDENSTERN What should we say, my lord?
HAMLET Anything but to th’ purpose. You were sent
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
which your modesties have not craft enough to
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
you.
ROSENCRANTZ To what end, my lord?
HAMLET That you must teach me. But let me conjure
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
love, and by what more dear a better
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
with me whether you were sent for or no.
ROSENCRANTZ, to Guildenstern What say you?
HAMLET, aside Nay, then, I have an eye of you.—If
you love me, hold not off.
GUILDENSTERN My lord, we were sent for.
HAMLET I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
with golden fire—why, it appeareth nothing to me
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
how express and admirable; in action how like
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals—and
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
your smiling you seem to say so.
ROSENCRANTZ My lord, there was no such stuff in my
thoughts.
HAMLET Why did you laugh, then, when I said “man
delights not me”?
ROSENCRANTZ To think, my lord, if you delight not in
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
hither are they coming to offer you service.
HAMLET He that plays the king shall be welcome—his
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
whose lungs are tickle o’ th’ sear, and the lady
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt for ’t. What players are they?
ROSENCRANTZ Even those you were wont to take such
delight in, the tragedians of the city.
HAMLET How chances it they travel? Their residence,
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
ROSENCRANTZ I think their inhibition comes by the
means of the late innovation.
HAMLET Do they hold the same estimation they did
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?
ROSENCRANTZ No, indeed are they not.
HAMLET How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
ROSENCRANTZ Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
most tyrannically clapped for ’t. These are now the
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
HAMLET What, are they children? Who maintains ’em?
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
players (as it is most like, if their means are
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
them exclaim against their own succession?
ROSENCRANTZ Faith, there has been much to-do on
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
them to controversy. There was for a while no
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
player went to cuffs in the question.
HAMLET Is ’t possible?
GUILDENSTERN O, there has been much throwing
about of brains.
HAMLET Do the boys carry it away?
ROSENCRANTZ Ay, that they do, my lord—Hercules
and his load too.
HAMLET It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
’Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
if philosophy could find it out.
A flourish for the Players.
GUILDENSTERN There are the players.
HAMLET Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
Your hands, come then. Th’ appurtenance of welcome
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
deceived.
GUILDENSTERN In what, my dear lord?
HAMLET I am but mad north-north-west. When the
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.

Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS Well be with you, gentlemen.
HAMLET Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too—at
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.
ROSENCRANTZ Haply he is the second time come to
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.
HAMLET I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
players; mark it.—You say right, sir, a Monday
morning, ’twas then indeed.
POLONIUS My lord, I have news to tell you.
HAMLET My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
was an actor in Rome—
POLONIUS The actors are come hither, my lord.
HAMLET Buzz, buzz.
POLONIUS Upon my honor—
HAMLET Then came each actor on his ass.
POLONIUS The best actors in the world, either for
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
these are the only men.
HAMLET O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
hadst thou!
POLONIUS What a treasure had he, my lord?
HAMLET Why,
One fair daughter, and no more,
The which he lovèd passing well.
POLONIUS, aside Still on my daughter.
HAMLET Am I not i’ th’ right, old Jephthah?
POLONIUS If you call me “Jephthah,” my lord: I have a
daughter that I love passing well.
HAMLET Nay, that follows not.
POLONIUS What follows then, my lord?
HAMLET Why,
As by lot, God wot
and then, you know,
It came to pass, as most like it was—
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
more, for look where my abridgment comes.

Enter the Players.

You are welcome, masters; welcome all.—I am glad
to see thee well.—Welcome, good friends.—O my
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
last. Com’st thou to beard me in Denmark?—What,
my young lady and mistress! By ’r Lady, your Ladyship
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We’ll e’en to ’t
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We’ll
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.
FIRST PLAYER What speech, my good lord?
HAMLET I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
’twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
received it, and others whose judgments in such
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
the author of affection, but called it an honest
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
more handsome than fine. One speech in ’t I
chiefly loved. ’Twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
Priam’s slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
this line—let me see, let me see:
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th’ Hyrcanian beast—
’tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couchèd in th’ ominous horse,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous and a damnèd light
To their lord’s murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o’ersizèd with coagulate gore,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
So, proceed you.
POLONIUS ’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
accent and good discretion.
FIRST PLAYER Anon he finds him
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
Th’ unnervèd father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear. For lo, his sword,
Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seemed i’ th’ air to stick.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus’ pause,
Arousèd vengeance sets him new a-work,
And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall
On Mars’s armor, forged for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
In general synod take away her power,
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
As low as to the fiends!
POLONIUS This is too long.
HAMLET It shall to the barber’s with your beard.—
Prithee say on. He’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.
FIRST PLAYER 
But who, ah woe, had seen the moblèd queen—
HAMLET “The moblèd queen”?
POLONIUS That’s good. “Moblèd queen” is good.
FIRST PLAYER 
Run barefoot up and down, threat’ning the flames
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
About her lank and all o’erteemèd loins
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up—
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have
pronounced.
But if the gods themselves did see her then
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs,
The instant burst of clamor that she made
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
And passion in the gods.
POLONIUS Look whe’er he has not turned his color and
has tears in ’s eyes. Prithee, no more.
HAMLET ’Tis well. I’ll have thee speak out the rest of
this soon.—Good my lord, will you see the players
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
time. After your death you were better have a bad
epitaph than their ill report while you live.
POLONIUS My lord, I will use them according to their
desert.
HAMLET God’s bodykins, man, much better! Use every
man after his desert and who shall ’scape
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
your bounty. Take them in.
POLONIUS Come, sirs.
HAMLET Follow him, friends. We’ll hear a play
tomorrow. As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
the First Player. Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
you play “The Murder of Gonzago”?
FIRST PLAYER Ay, my lord.
HAMLET We’ll ha ’t tomorrow night. You could, for a
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
lines, which I would set down and insert in ’t,
could you not?
FIRST PLAYER Ay, my lord.
HAMLET Very well. Follow that lord—and look you
mock him not. First Player exits. My good friends,
I’ll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.
ROSENCRANTZ Good my lord.
HAMLET 
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Now I am alone.
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit—and all for nothing!
For Hecuba!
What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing—no, not for a king
Upon whose property and most dear life
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Who calls me “villain”? breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i’ th’ throat
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
Ha! ’Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
I should have fatted all the region kites
With this slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
villain!
O vengeance!
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
A stallion! Fie upon ’t! Foh!
About, my brains!—Hum, I have heard
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
Been struck so to the soul that presently
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ. I’ll have these players
Play something like the murder of my father
Before mine uncle. I’ll observe his looks;
I’ll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
T’ assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with such spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. I’ll have grounds
More relative than this. The play’s the thing
Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the King.
He exits.


ACT 3
Scene 1
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Guildenstern, and Lords.

KING 
And can you by no drift of conference
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
ROSENCRANTZ 
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.
GUILDENSTERN 
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state.
QUEEN Did he receive you well?
ROSENCRANTZ Most like a gentleman.
GUILDENSTERN 
But with much forcing of his disposition.
ROSENCRANTZ 
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply.
QUEEN Did you assay him to any pastime?
ROSENCRANTZ 
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
We o’erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
And, as I think, they have already order
This night to play before him.
POLONIUS ’Tis most true,
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.
KING 
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
To hear him so inclined.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
And drive his purpose into these delights.
ROSENCRANTZ 
We shall, my lord.Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
and Lords exit.
KING Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as ’twere by accident, may here
Affront Ophelia.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
We may of their encounter frankly judge
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If ’t be th’ affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for.
QUEEN I shall obey you.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlet’s wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your honors.
OPHELIA Madam, I wish it may.
Queen exits.
POLONIUS 
Ophelia, walk you here.—Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves. To Ophelia. Read on this
book,
That show of such an exercise may color
Your loneliness.—We are oft to blame in this
(’Tis too much proved), that with devotion’s visage
And pious action we do sugar o’er
The devil himself.
KING, asideO, ’tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
conscience.
The harlot’s cheek beautied with plast’ring art
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
O heavy burden!
POLONIUS 
I hear him coming. Let’s withdraw, my lord.
They withdraw.

Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET 
To be or not to be—that is the question:
Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep—
No more—and by a sleep to say we end
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to—’tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep—
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there’s the rub,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There’s the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Th’ oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of th’ unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry
And lose the name of action.—Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia.—Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins remembered.
OPHELIA Good my lord,
How does your Honor for this many a day?
HAMLET I humbly thank you, well.
OPHELIA 
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
That I have longèd long to redeliver.
I pray you now receive them.
HAMLET 
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
OPHELIA 
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
lost,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.
HAMLET Ha, ha, are you honest?
OPHELIA My lord?
HAMLET Are you fair?
OPHELIA What means your Lordship?
HAMLET That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
should admit no discourse to your beauty.
OPHELIA Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
than with honesty?
HAMLET Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
OPHELIA Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
HAMLET You should not have believed me, for virtue
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
relish of it. I loved you not.
OPHELIA I was the more deceived.
HAMLET Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
Where’s your father?
OPHELIA At home, my lord.
HAMLET Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
play the fool nowhere but in ’s own house. Farewell.
OPHELIA O, help him, you sweet heavens!
HAMLET If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
quickly too. Farewell.
OPHELIA Heavenly powers, restore him!
HAMLET I have heard of your paintings too, well
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
you lisp; you nickname God’s creatures and make
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I’ll no
more on ’t. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
To a nunnery, go.He exits.
OPHELIA 
O, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown!
The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue,
sword,
Th’ expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
Th’ observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
T’ have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
KING, advancing with Polonius 
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul
O’er which his melancholy sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
I have in quick determination
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
With variable objects, shall expel
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on ’t?
POLONIUS 
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love.—How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
We heard it all.—My lord, do as you please,
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
And I’ll be placed, so please you, in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him, or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.
KING It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
They exit.


Scene 2
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.

HAMLET Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
whipped for o’erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.
PLAYER I warrant your Honor.
HAMLET Be not too tame neither, but let your own
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
word, the word to the action, with this special
observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of
nature. For anything so o’erdone is from the purpose
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
now, was and is to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
own image, and the very age and body of the time
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
having th’ accent of Christians nor the gait of
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s
journeymen had made men, and not made them
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
PLAYER I hope we have reformed that indifferently
with us, sir.
HAMLET O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
them, for there be of them that will themselves
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
question of the play be then to be considered.
That’s villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
Players exit.

Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.

How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
work?
POLONIUS And the Queen too, and that presently.
HAMLET Bid the players make haste.Polonius exits.
Will you two help to hasten them?
ROSENCRANTZ Ay, my lord.They exit.
HAMLET What ho, Horatio!

Enter Horatio.

HORATIO Here, sweet lord, at your service.
HAMLET 
Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man
As e’er my conversation coped withal.
HORATIO 
O, my dear lord—
HAMLET Nay, do not think I flatter,
For what advancement may I hope from thee
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
flattered?
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
A man that Fortune’s buffets and rewards
Hast ta’en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Whose blood and judgment are so well
commeddled
That they are not a pipe for Fortune’s finger
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him
In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart,
As I do thee.—Something too much of this.—
There is a play tonight before the King.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee of my father’s death.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damnèd ghost that we have seen,
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note,
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
And, after, we will both our judgments join
In censure of his seeming.
HORATIO Well, my lord.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
Sound a flourish.
HAMLET They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
Get you a place.

Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Lords attendant with the King’s guard carrying
torches.

KING How fares our cousin Hamlet?
HAMLET Excellent, i’ faith, of the chameleon’s dish. I
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
capons so.
KING I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
words are not mine.
HAMLET No, nor mine now. To Polonius. My lord, you
played once i’ th’ university, you say?
POLONIUS That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
good actor.
HAMLET What did you enact?
POLONIUS I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i’ th’
Capitol. Brutus killed me.
HAMLET It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
calf there.—Be the players ready?
ROSENCRANTZ Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
patience.
QUEEN Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
HAMLET No, good mother. Here’s metal more
attractive.Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.
POLONIUS, to the King Oh, ho! Do you mark that?
HAMLET Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
OPHELIA No, my lord.
HAMLET I mean, my head upon your lap?
OPHELIA Ay, my lord.
HAMLET Do you think I meant country matters?
OPHELIA I think nothing, my lord.
HAMLET That’s a fair thought to lie between maids’
legs.
OPHELIA What is, my lord?
HAMLET Nothing.
OPHELIA You are merry, my lord.
HAMLET Who, I?
OPHELIA Ay, my lord.
HAMLET O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
my mother looks, and my father died within ’s two
hours.
OPHELIA Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.
HAMLET So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
for I’ll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there’s
hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half
a year. But, by ’r Lady, he must build churches, then,
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For oh, for oh, the
hobby-horse is forgot.”
The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.

Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
poison in the sleeper’s ears, and leaves him. The Queen
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
awhile but in the end accepts his love.
Players exit.
OPHELIA What means this, my lord?
HAMLET Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
mischief.
OPHELIA Belike this show imports the argument of the
play.

Enter Prologue.

HAMLET We shall know by this fellow. The players
cannot keep counsel; they’ll tell all.
OPHELIA Will he tell us what this show meant?
HAMLET Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
not you ashamed to show, he’ll not shame to tell you
what it means.
OPHELIA You are naught, you are naught. I’ll mark the
play.
PROLOGUE 
For us and for our tragedy,
Here stooping to your clemency,
We beg your hearing patiently.He exits.
HAMLET Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?
OPHELIA ’Tis brief, my lord.
HAMLET As woman’s love.

Enter the Player King and Queen.

PLAYER KING 
Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round
Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbèd ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
PLAYER QUEEN 
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o’er ere love be done!
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
For women fear too much, even as they love,
And women’s fear and love hold quantity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
PLAYER KING 
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou—
PLAYER QUEEN O, confound the rest!
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
In second husband let me be accurst.
None wed the second but who killed the first.
HAMLET That’s wormwood!
PLAYER QUEEN 
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead
When second husband kisses me in bed.
PLAYER KING 
I do believe you think what now you speak,
But what we do determine oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary ’tis that we forget
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
For ’tis a question left us yet to prove
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
Directly seasons him his enemy.
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown;
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
PLAYER QUEEN 
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope.
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.
HAMLET If she should break it now!
PLAYER KING 
’Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.Sleeps.
PLAYER QUEEN Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain.
Player Queen exits.
HAMLET Madam, how like you this play?
QUEEN The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
HAMLET O, but she’ll keep her word.
KING Have you heard the argument? Is there no
offense in ’t?
HAMLET No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
offense i’ th’ world.
KING What do you call the play?
HAMLET “The Mousetrap.” Marry, how? Tropically.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
Gonzago is the duke’s name, his wife Baptista. You
shall see anon. ’Tis a knavish piece of work, but
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
our withers are unwrung.

Enter Lucianus.

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
OPHELIA You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
HAMLET I could interpret between you and your love,
if I could see the puppets dallying.
OPHELIA You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
HAMLET It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
edge.
OPHELIA Still better and worse.
HAMLET So you mis-take your husbands.—Begin,
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
revenge.
LUCIANUS 
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
Pours the poison in his ears.
HAMLET He poisons him i’ th’ garden for his estate. His
name’s Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.
Claudius rises.
OPHELIA The King rises.
HAMLET What, frighted with false fire?
QUEEN How fares my lord?
POLONIUS Give o’er the play.
KING Give me some light. Away!
POLONIUS Lights, lights, lights!
All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.
HAMLET 
Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
The hart ungallèd play.
For some must watch, while some must sleep:
Thus runs the world away.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
fellowship in a cry of players?
HORATIO Half a share.
HAMLET A whole one, I.
For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
This realm dismantled was
Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
A very very—pajock.
HORATIO You might have rhymed.
HAMLET O good Horatio, I’ll take the ghost’s word for
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?
HORATIO Very well, my lord.
HAMLET Upon the talk of the poisoning?
HORATIO I did very well note him.
HAMLET Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
recorders!
For if the King like not the comedy,
Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Come, some music!

Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

GUILDENSTERN Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
with you.
HAMLET Sir, a whole history.
GUILDENSTERN The King, sir—
HAMLET Ay, sir, what of him?
GUILDENSTERN Is in his retirement marvelous
distempered.
HAMLET With drink, sir?
GUILDENSTERN No, my lord, with choler.
HAMLET Your wisdom should show itself more richer
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
choler.
GUILDENSTERN Good my lord, put your discourse into
some frame and start not so wildly from my
affair.
HAMLET I am tame, sir. Pronounce.
GUILDENSTERN The Queen your mother, in most great
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
HAMLET You are welcome.
GUILDENSTERN Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother’s
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
shall be the end of my business.
HAMLET Sir, I cannot.
ROSENCRANTZ What, my lord?
HAMLET Make you a wholesome answer. My wit’s
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
shall command—or, rather, as you say, my mother.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
you say—
ROSENCRANTZ Then thus she says: your behavior hath
struck her into amazement and admiration.
HAMLET O wonderful son that can so ’stonish a mother!
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
mother’s admiration? Impart.
ROSENCRANTZ She desires to speak with you in her
closet ere you go to bed.
HAMLET We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
Have you any further trade with us?
ROSENCRANTZ My lord, you once did love me.
HAMLET And do still, by these pickers and stealers.
ROSENCRANTZ Good my lord, what is your cause of
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.
HAMLET Sir, I lack advancement.
ROSENCRANTZ How can that be, when you have the
voice of the King himself for your succession in
Denmark?
HAMLET Ay, sir, but “While the grass grows”—the
proverb is something musty.

Enter the Players with recorders.

O, the recorders! Let me see one. He takes a
recorder and turns to Guildenstern. To withdraw
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
GUILDENSTERN O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
love is too unmannerly.
HAMLET I do not well understand that. Will you play
upon this pipe?
GUILDENSTERN My lord, I cannot.
HAMLET I pray you.
GUILDENSTERN Believe me, I cannot.
HAMLET I do beseech you.
GUILDENSTERN I know no touch of it, my lord.
HAMLET It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
music. Look you, these are the stops.
GUILDENSTERN But these cannot I command to any
utt’rance of harmony. I have not the skill.
HAMLET Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. ’Sblood,
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
fret me, you cannot play upon me.

Enter Polonius.

God bless you, sir.
POLONIUS My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
and presently.
HAMLET Do you see yonder cloud that’s almost in
shape of a camel?
POLONIUS By th’ Mass, and ’tis like a camel indeed.
HAMLET Methinks it is like a weasel.
POLONIUS It is backed like a weasel.
HAMLET Or like a whale.
POLONIUS Very like a whale.
HAMLET Then I will come to my mother by and by.
Aside. They fool me to the top of my bent.—I will
come by and by.
POLONIUS I will say so.
HAMLET “By and by” is easily said. Leave me,
friends.
All but Hamlet exit.
’Tis now the very witching time of night,
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
blood
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
How in my words somever she be shent,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
He exits.



Scene 3
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.

KING 
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
Hazard so near ’s as doth hourly grow
Out of his brows.
GUILDENSTERN We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
ROSENCRANTZ 
The single and peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and armor of the mind
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
What’s near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist’rous ruin. Never alone
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
KING 
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.
ROSENCRANTZ We will haste us.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.

Enter Polonius.

POLONIUS 
My lord, he’s going to his mother’s closet.
Behind the arras I’ll convey myself
To hear the process. I’ll warrant she’ll tax him
home;
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
’Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Since nature makes them partial, should o’erhear
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
I’ll call upon you ere you go to bed
And tell you what I know.
KING Thanks, dear my lord.
Polonius exits.
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
It hath the primal eldest curse upon ’t,
A brother’s murder. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
And both neglect. What if this cursèd hand
Were thicker than itself with brother’s blood?
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offense?
And what’s in prayer but this twofold force,
To be forestallèd ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned being down? Then I’ll look up.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? “Forgive me my foul murder”?
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain th’ offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offense’s gilded hand may shove by justice,
And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. But ’tis not so above:
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O limèd soul, that, struggling to be free,
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
All may be well.He kneels.

Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET 
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
And now I’ll do ’t.He draws his sword.
And so he goes to heaven,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
A villain kills my father, and for that,
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
To heaven.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
But in our circumstance and course of thought
’Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
No.
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
He sheathes his sword.
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Or in th’ incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
That has no relish of salvation in ’t—
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
Hamlet exits.
KING, rising 
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
He exits.


Scene 4
Enter Queen and Polonius.

POLONIUS 
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
with
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
between
Much heat and him. I’ll silence me even here.
Pray you, be round with him.
HAMLET, within Mother, mother, mother!
QUEEN I’ll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
I hear him coming.
Polonius hides behind the arras.

Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET Now, mother, what’s the matter?
QUEEN 
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
HAMLET 
Mother, you have my father much offended.
QUEEN 
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
HAMLET 
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
QUEEN 
Why, how now, Hamlet?
HAMLET What’s the matter now?
QUEEN 
Have you forgot me?
HAMLET No, by the rood, not so.
You are the Queen, your husband’s brother’s wife,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.
QUEEN 
Nay, then I’ll set those to you that can speak.
HAMLET 
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
QUEEN 
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
Help, ho!
POLONIUS, behind the arras What ho! Help!
HAMLET 
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
through the arras.
POLONIUS, behind the arras 
O, I am slain!
QUEEN O me, what hast thou done?
HAMLET Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
QUEEN 
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
HAMLET 
A bloody deed—almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king and marry with his brother.
QUEEN 
As kill a king?
HAMLET Ay, lady, it was my word.
He pulls Polonius’ body from behind the arras.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Thou find’st to be too busy is some danger.
To Queen. Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
you down,
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If damnèd custom have not brazed it so
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.
QUEEN 
What have I done, that thou dar’st wag thy tongue
In noise so rude against me?
HAMLET Such an act
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
As false as dicers’ oaths—O, such a deed
As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
A rhapsody of words! Heaven’s face does glow
O’er this solidity and compound mass
With heated visage, as against the doom,
Is thought-sick at the act.
QUEEN Ay me, what act
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
HAMLET 
Look here upon this picture and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperion’s curls, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars’ to threaten and command,
A station like the herald Mercury
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
A combination and a form indeed
Where every god did seem to set his seal
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
You cannot call it love, for at your age
The heyday in the blood is tame, it’s humble
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne’er so thralled,
But it reserved some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference. What devil was ’t
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Rebellious hell,
If thou canst mutine in a matron’s bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
And reason panders will.
QUEEN O Hamlet, speak no more!
Thou turn’st my eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and grainèd spots
As will not leave their tinct.
HAMLET Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamèd bed,
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the nasty sty!
QUEEN O, speak to me no more!
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
No more, sweet Hamlet!
HAMLET A murderer and a villain,
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
And put it in his pocket—
QUEEN No more!
HAMLET A king of shreds and patches—

Enter Ghost.

Save me and hover o’er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards!—What would your gracious
figure?
QUEEN Alas, he’s mad.
HAMLET 
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
Th’ important acting of your dread command?
O, say!
GHOST Do not forget. This visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, Hamlet.
HAMLET How is it with you, lady?
QUEEN Alas, how is ’t with you,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
And with th’ incorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th’ alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
HAMLET 
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable. To the Ghost. Do not
look upon me,
Lest with this piteous action you convert
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
Will want true color—tears perchance for blood.
QUEEN To whom do you speak this?
HAMLET Do you see nothing there?
QUEEN 
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
HAMLET Nor did you nothing hear?
QUEEN No, nothing but ourselves.
HAMLET 
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he lived!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
Ghost exits.
QUEEN 
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
Is very cunning in.
HAMLET Ecstasy?
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
And I the matter will reword, which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Repent what’s past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
QUEEN 
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!
HAMLET 
O, throw away the worser part of it,
And live the purer with the other half!
Good night. But go not to my uncle’s bed.
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good
He likewise gives a frock or livery
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
And either … the devil or throw him out
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
I’ll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
Pointing to Polonius.
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
To punish me with this and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him and will answer well
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
I must be cruel only to be kind.
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.
QUEEN What shall I do?
HAMLET 
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out
That I essentially am not in madness,
But mad in craft. ’Twere good you let him know,
For who that’s but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Unpeg the basket on the house’s top,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
And break your own neck down.
QUEEN 
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
What thou hast said to me.
HAMLET 
I must to England, you know that.
QUEEN Alack,
I had forgot! ’Tis so concluded on.
HAMLET 
There’s letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
For ’tis the sport to have the enginer
Hoist with his own petard; and ’t shall go hard
But I will delve one yard below their mines
And blow them at the moon. O, ’tis most sweet
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing.
I’ll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.—
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.—
Good night, mother.
They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.


ACT 4
Scene 1
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern.

KING 
There’s matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
You must translate; ’tis fit we understand them.
Where is your son?
QUEEN 
Bestow this place on us a little while.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!
KING What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
QUEEN 
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries “A rat, a rat,”
And in this brainish apprehension kills
The unseen good old man.
KING O heavy deed!
It had been so with us, had we been there.
His liberty is full of threats to all—
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
We would not understand what was most fit,
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
QUEEN 
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
O’er whom his very madness, like some ore
Among a mineral of metals base,
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.
KING O Gertrude, come away!
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
We must with all our majesty and skill
Both countenance and excuse.—Ho, Guildenstern!

Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
And from his mother’s closet hath he dragged him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Come, Gertrude, we’ll call up our wisest friends
And let them know both what we mean to do
And what’s untimely done. …
Whose whisper o’er the world’s diameter,
As level as the cannon to his blank
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
They exit.



Scene 2
Enter Hamlet.

HAMLET Safely stowed.
GENTLEMEN, within Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
HAMLET But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
O, here they come.

Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.

ROSENCRANTZ 
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
HAMLET 
Compounded it with dust, whereto ’tis kin.
ROSENCRANTZ 
Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thence
And bear it to the chapel.
HAMLET Do not believe it.
ROSENCRANTZ Believe what?
HAMLET That I can keep your counsel and not mine
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
replication should be made by the son of a king?
ROSENCRANTZ Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
HAMLET Ay, sir, that soaks up the King’s countenance,
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
shall be dry again.
ROSENCRANTZ I understand you not, my lord.
HAMLET I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
foolish ear.
ROSENCRANTZ My lord, you must tell us where the
body is and go with us to the King.
HAMLET The body is with the King, but the King is not
with the body. The King is a thing—
GUILDENSTERN A “thing,” my lord?
HAMLET Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
all after!
They exit.


Scene 3
Enter King and two or three.

KING 
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
He’s loved of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
And, where ’tis so, th’ offender’s scourge is weighed,
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
This sudden sending him away must seem
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
By desperate appliance are relieved
Or not at all.

Enter Rosencrantz.

How now, what hath befallen?
ROSENCRANTZ 
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
We cannot get from him.
KING But where is he?
ROSENCRANTZ 
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
KING 
Bring him before us.
ROSENCRANTZ Ho! Bring in the lord.

They enter with Hamlet.

KING Now, Hamlet, where’s Polonius?
HAMLET At supper.
KING At supper where?
HAMLET Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
certain convocation of politic worms are e’en at
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
but variable service—two dishes but to one table.
That’s the end.
KING Alas, alas!
HAMLET A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
worm.
KING What dost thou mean by this?
HAMLET Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
progress through the guts of a beggar.
KING Where is Polonius?
HAMLET In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
find him not there, seek him i’ th’ other
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
the stairs into the lobby.
KING, to Attendants. Go, seek him there.
HAMLET He will stay till you come.Attendants exit.
KING 
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
hence
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
Th’ associates tend, and everything is bent
For England.
HAMLET For England?
KING Ay, Hamlet.
HAMLET Good.
KING 
So is it, if thou knew’st our purposes.
HAMLET 
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
England.
Farewell, dear mother.
KING Thy loving father, Hamlet.
HAMLET 
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.—
Come, for England.He exits.
KING 
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Delay it not. I’ll have him hence tonight.
Away, for everything is sealed and done
That else leans on th’ affair. Pray you, make haste.
All but the King exit.
And England, if my love thou hold’st at aught
(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
By letters congruing to that effect,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me. Till I know ’tis done,
Howe’er my haps, my joys will ne’er begin.
He exits.


Scene 4
Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.

FORTINBRAS 
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
We shall express our duty in his eye;
And let him know so.
CAPTAIN I will do ’t, my lord.
FORTINBRAS Go softly on.All but the Captain exit.

Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.

HAMLET Good sir, whose powers are these?
CAPTAIN They are of Norway, sir.
HAMLET How purposed, sir, I pray you?
CAPTAIN Against some part of Poland.
HAMLET Who commands them, sir?
CAPTAIN 
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
HAMLET 
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Or for some frontier?
CAPTAIN 
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
That hath in it no profit but the name.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
HAMLET 
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.
CAPTAIN 
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
HAMLET 
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Will not debate the question of this straw.
This is th’ impostume of much wealth and peace,
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
Why the man dies.—I humbly thank you, sir.
CAPTAIN God be wi’ you, sir.He exits.
ROSENCRANTZ Will ’t please you go, my lord?
HAMLET 
I’ll be with you straight. Go a little before.
All but Hamlet exit.
How all occasions do inform against me
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
If his chief good and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reason
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Of thinking too precisely on th’ event
(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
wisdom
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
Why yet I live to say “This thing’s to do,”
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To do ’t. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Is not to stir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
When honor’s at the stake. How stand I, then,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
He exits.


Scene 5
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.

QUEEN I will not speak with her.
GENTLEMAN She is importunate,
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.
QUEEN What would she have?
GENTLEMAN 
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
There’s tricks i’ th’ world, and hems, and beats her
heart,
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
Yet the unshapèd use of it doth move
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
them,
Indeed would make one think there might be
thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
HORATIO 
’Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
strew
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
QUEEN Let her come in.Gentleman exits.
Aside. To my sick soul (as sin’s true nature is),
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
Enter Ophelia distracted.

OPHELIA 
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
QUEEN How now, Ophelia?
OPHELIA sings 
How should I your true love know
From another one?
By his cockle hat and staff
And his sandal shoon.
QUEEN 
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
OPHELIA Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
Sings.He is dead and gone, lady,
He is dead and gone;
At his head a grass-green turf,
At his heels a stone.
Oh, ho!
QUEEN Nay, but Ophelia—
OPHELIA Pray you, mark.
Sings.White his shroud as the mountain snow—

Enter King.

QUEEN Alas, look here, my lord.
OPHELIA sings 
Larded all with sweet flowers;
Which bewept to the ground did not go
With true-love showers.
KING How do you, pretty lady?
OPHELIA Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
baker’s daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
know not what we may be. God be at your table.
KING Conceit upon her father.
OPHELIA Pray let’s have no words of this, but when
they ask you what it means, say you this:
Sings.Tomorrow is Saint Valentine’s day,
All in the morning betime,
And I a maid at your window,
To be your Valentine.
Then up he rose and donned his clothes
And dupped the chamber door,
Let in the maid, that out a maid
Never departed more.
KING Pretty Ophelia—
OPHELIA 
Indeed, without an oath, I’ll make an end on ’t:
Sings.By Gis and by Saint Charity,
Alack and fie for shame,
Young men will do ’t, if they come to ’t;
By Cock, they are to blame.
Quoth she “Before you tumbled me,
You promised me to wed.”
He answers:
“So would I ’a done, by yonder sun,
An thou hadst not come to my bed.”
KING How long hath she been thus?
OPHELIA I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
lay him i’ th’ cold ground. My brother shall know of
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
ladies, good night, good night.She exits.
KING 
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
Horatio exits.
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
All from her father’s death, and now behold!
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
whispers
For good Polonius’ death, and we have done but
greenly
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent speeches of his father’s death,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
Like to a murd’ring piece, in many places
Gives me superfluous death.
A noise within.
QUEEN Alack, what noise is this?
KING Attend!
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

Enter a Messenger.

What is the matter?
MESSENGER Save yourself, my lord.
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
O’erbears your officers. The rabble call him “lord,”
And, as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
The ratifiers and props of every word,
They cry “Choose we, Laertes shall be king!”
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
“Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!”
A noise within.
QUEEN 
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
KING The doors are broke.

Enter Laertes with others.

LAERTES 
Where is this king?—Sirs, stand you all without.
ALL No, let’s come in!
LAERTES I pray you, give me leave.
ALL We will, we will.
LAERTES 
I thank you. Keep the door. Followers exit. O, thou
vile king,
Give me my father!
QUEEN Calmly, good Laertes.
LAERTES 
That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me
bastard,
Cries “cuckold” to my father, brands the harlot
Even here between the chaste unsmirchèd brow
Of my true mother.
KING What is the cause, Laertes,
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?—
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
There’s such divinity doth hedge a king
That treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will.—Tell me, Laertes,
Why thou art thus incensed.—Let him go,
Gertrude.—
Speak, man.
LAERTES Where is my father?
KING Dead.
QUEEN 
But not by him.
KING Let him demand his fill.
LAERTES 
How came he dead? I’ll not be juggled with.
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Let come what comes, only I’ll be revenged
Most throughly for my father.
KING Who shall stay you?
LAERTES My will, not all the world.
And for my means, I’ll husband them so well
They shall go far with little.
KING Good Laertes,
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear father, is ’t writ in your revenge
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
foe,
Winner and loser?
LAERTES None but his enemies.
KING Will you know them, then?
LAERTES 
To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my arms
And, like the kind life-rend’ring pelican,
Repast them with my blood.
KING Why, now you speak
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your father’s death
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
It shall as level to your judgment ’pear
As day does to your eye.
A noise within: “Let her come in!”
LAERTES How now, what noise is that?

Enter Ophelia.

O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
O heavens, is ’t possible a young maid’s wits
Should be as mortal as an old man’s life?
Nature is fine in love, and, where ’tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of itself
After the thing it loves.
OPHELIA sings 
They bore him barefaced on the bier,
Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
And in his grave rained many a tear.
Fare you well, my dove.
LAERTES 
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
It could not move thus.
OPHELIA You must sing “A-down a-down”—and you
“Call him a-down-a.”—O, how the wheel becomes
it! It is the false steward that stole his master’s
daughter.
LAERTES This nothing’s more than matter.
OPHELIA There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance.
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
that’s for thoughts.
LAERTES A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
fitted.
OPHELIA There’s fennel for you, and columbines.
There’s rue for you, and here’s some for me; we
may call it herb of grace o’ Sundays. You must wear
your rue with a difference. There’s a daisy. I would
give you some violets, but they withered all when
my father died. They say he made a good end.
Sings. For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
LAERTES 
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
She turns to favor and to prettiness.
OPHELIA sings 
And will he not come again?
And will he not come again?
No, no, he is dead.
Go to thy deathbed.
He never will come again.

His beard was as white as snow,
All flaxen was his poll.
He is gone, he is gone,
And we cast away moan.
God ’a mercy on his soul.
And of all Christians’ souls, I pray God. God be wi’
you.She exits.
LAERTES Do you see this, O God?
KING 
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge ’twixt you and me.
If by direct or by collateral hand
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
To give it due content.
LAERTES Let this be so.
His means of death, his obscure funeral
(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones,
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
Cry to be heard, as ’twere from heaven to earth,
That I must call ’t in question.
KING So you shall,
And where th’ offense is, let the great ax fall.
I pray you, go with me.
They exit.



Scene 6
Enter Horatio and others.

HORATIO What are they that would speak with me?
GENTLEMAN Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
letters for you.
HORATIO Let them come in. Gentleman exits. I do not
know from what part of the world I should be
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

Enter Sailors.

SAILOR God bless you, sir.
HORATIO Let Him bless thee too.
SAILOR He shall, sir, an ’t please Him. There’s a letter
for you, sir. It came from th’ ambassador that was
bound for England—if your name be Horatio, as I
am let to know it is.He hands Horatio a letter.
HORATIO reads the letter Horatio, when thou shalt have
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
hold their course for England; of them I have
much to tell thee. Farewell.
He that thou knowest thine,
Hamlet.
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
And do ’t the speedier that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
They exit.


Scene 7
Enter King and Laertes.

KING 
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain
Pursued my life.
LAERTES It well appears. But tell me
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
So criminal and so capital in nature,
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
You mainly were stirred up.
KING O, for two special reasons,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
But yet to me they’re strong. The Queen his mother
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
I could not but by her. The other motive
Why to a public count I might not go
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
Would have reverted to my bow again,
But not where I have aimed them.
LAERTES 
And so have I a noble father lost,
A sister driven into desp’rate terms,
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
KING 
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine—

Enter a Messenger with letters.

How now? What news?
MESSENGER Letters, my lord, from
Hamlet.
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.
KING From Hamlet? Who brought them?
MESSENGER 
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
Of him that brought them.
KING Laertes, you shall hear
them.—
Leave us.Messenger exits.
Reads. High and mighty, you shall know I am set
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
and more strange return. Hamlet.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?
LAERTES Know you the hand?
KING ’Tis Hamlet’s character. “Naked”—
And in a postscript here, he says “alone.”
Can you advise me?
LAERTES 
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
It warms the very sickness in my heart
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
“Thus didst thou.”
KING If it be so, Laertes
(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
Will you be ruled by me?
LAERTES Ay, my lord,
So you will not o’errule me to a peace.
KING 
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it, I will work him
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
And call it accident.
LAERTES My lord, I will be ruled,
The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ.
KING It falls right.
You have been talked of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Did not together pluck such envy from him
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
Of the unworthiest siege.
LAERTES What part is that, my lord?
KING 
A very ribbon in the cap of youth—
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
The light and careless livery that it wears
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
Had witchcraft in ’t. He grew unto his seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
Come short of what he did.
LAERTES A Norman was ’t?
KING A Norman.
LAERTES 
Upon my life, Lamord.
KING The very same.
LAERTES 
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
And gem of all the nation.
KING He made confession of you
And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defense,
And for your rapier most especial,
That he cried out ’twould be a sight indeed
If one could match you. The ’scrimers of their
nation
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
Your sudden coming-o’er, to play with you.
Now out of this—
LAERTES What out of this, my lord?
KING 
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?
LAERTES Why ask you this?
KING 
Not that I think you did not love your father,
But that I know love is begun by time
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
There lives within the very flame of love
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
We should do when we would; for this “would”
changes
And hath abatements and delays as many
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
And then this “should” is like a spendthrift sigh,
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th’ ulcer:
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
To show yourself indeed your father’s son
More than in words?
LAERTES To cut his throat i’ th’ church.
KING 
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
together
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
Requite him for your father.
LAERTES I will do ’t,
And for that purpose I’ll anoint my sword.
I bought an unction of a mountebank
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
That is but scratched withal. I’ll touch my point
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
It may be death.
KING Let’s further think of this,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
And that our drift look through our bad
performance,
’Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Should have a back or second that might hold
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings—
I ha ’t!
When in your motion you are hot and dry
(As make your bouts more violent to that end)
And that he calls for drink, I’ll have prepared
him
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Our purpose may hold there.—But stay, what
noise?

Enter Queen.

QUEEN 
One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,
So fast they follow. Your sister’s drowned, Laertes.
LAERTES Drowned? O, where?
QUEEN 
There is a willow grows askant the brook
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
But our cold maids do “dead men’s fingers” call
them.
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
Clamb’ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
As one incapable of her own distress
Or like a creature native and endued
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
To muddy death.
LAERTES Alas, then she is drowned.
QUEEN Drowned, drowned.
LAERTES 
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
The woman will be out.—Adieu, my lord.
I have a speech o’ fire that fain would blaze,
But that this folly drowns it.He exits.
KING Let’s follow, Gertrude.
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Therefore, let’s follow.
They exit.


ACT 5
Scene 1
Enter Gravedigger and Another.

GRAVEDIGGER Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?
OTHER I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
Christian burial.
GRAVEDIGGER How can that be, unless she drowned
herself in her own defense?
OTHER Why, ’tis found so.
GRAVEDIGGER It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
branches—it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
drowned herself wittingly.
OTHER Nay, but hear you, goodman delver—
GRAVEDIGGER Give me leave. Here lies the water;
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
own life.
OTHER But is this law?
GRAVEDIGGER Ay, marry, is ’t—crowner’s ’quest law.
OTHER Will you ha’ the truth on ’t? If this had not been
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’
Christian burial.
GRAVEDIGGER Why, there thou sayst. And the more
pity that great folk should have count’nance in this
world to drown or hang themselves more than
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
ancient gentlemen but gard’ners, ditchers, and
grave-makers. They hold up Adam’s profession.
OTHER Was he a gentleman?
GRAVEDIGGER He was the first that ever bore arms.
OTHER Why, he had none.
GRAVEDIGGER What, art a heathen? How dost thou
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
digged. Could he dig without arms? I’ll put another
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
purpose, confess thyself—
OTHER Go to!
GRAVEDIGGER What is he that builds stronger than
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
OTHER The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
thousand tenants.
GRAVEDIGGER I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. To ’t again, come.
OTHER “Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
or a carpenter?”
GRAVEDIGGER Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
OTHER Marry, now I can tell.
GRAVEDIGGER To ’t.
OTHER Mass, I cannot tell.

Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.

GRAVEDIGGER Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
beating. And, when you are asked this question
next, say “a grave-maker.” The houses he makes
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
stoup of liquor.
The Other Man exits
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.
In youth when I did love, did love,
Methought it was very sweet
To contract—O—the time for—a—my behove,
O, methought there—a—was nothing—a—meet.
HAMLET Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
sings in grave-making.
HORATIO Custom hath made it in him a property of
easiness.
HAMLET ’Tis e’en so. The hand of little employment
hath the daintier sense.
GRAVEDIGGER sings 
But age with his stealing steps
Hath clawed me in his clutch,
And hath shipped me into the land,
As if I had never been such.
He digs up a skull.
HAMLET That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
’twere Cain’s jawbone, that did the first murder!
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
now o’erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
might it not?
HORATIO It might, my lord.
HAMLET Or of a courtier, which could say “Good
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?”
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
Lord Such-a-one’s horse when he went to beg it,
might it not?
HORATIO Ay, my lord.
HAMLET Why, e’en so. And now my Lady Worm’s,
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
sexton’s spade. Here’s fine revolution, an we had
the trick to see ’t. Did these bones cost no more the
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
ache to think on ’t.
GRAVEDIGGER sings 
A pickax and a spade, a spade,
For and a shrouding sheet,
O, a pit of clay for to be made
For such a guest is meet.
He digs up more skulls.
HAMLET There’s another. Why may not that be the
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
be in ’s time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
and must th’ inheritor himself have no more, ha?
HORATIO Not a jot more, my lord.
HAMLET Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
HORATIO Ay, my lord, and of calves’ skins too.
HAMLET They are sheep and calves which seek out
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.—
Whose grave’s this, sirrah?
GRAVEDIGGER Mine, sir.
Sings.O, a pit of clay for to be made
For such a guest is meet.
HAMLET I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in ’t.
GRAVEDIGGER You lie out on ’t, sir, and therefore ’tis
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in ’t, yet it is
mine.
HAMLET Thou dost lie in ’t, to be in ’t and say it is thine.
’Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
liest.
GRAVEDIGGER ’Tis a quick lie, sir; ’twill away again
from me to you.
HAMLET What man dost thou dig it for?
GRAVEDIGGER For no man, sir.
HAMLET What woman then?
GRAVEDIGGER For none, neither.
HAMLET Who is to be buried in ’t?
GRAVEDIGGER One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
her soul, she’s dead.
HAMLET How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
galls his kibe.—How long hast thou been
grave-maker?
GRAVEDIGGER Of all the days i’ th’ year, I came to ’t
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
Fortinbras.
HAMLET How long is that since?
GRAVEDIGGER Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
was born—he that is mad, and sent into England.
HAMLET Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
GRAVEDIGGER Why, because he was mad. He shall
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, ’tis no great
matter there.
HAMLET Why?
GRAVEDIGGER ’Twill not be seen in him there. There
the men are as mad as he.
HAMLET How came he mad?
GRAVEDIGGER Very strangely, they say.
HAMLET How “strangely”?
GRAVEDIGGER Faith, e’en with losing his wits.
HAMLET Upon what ground?
GRAVEDIGGER Why, here in Denmark. I have been
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
HAMLET How long will a man lie i’ th’ earth ere he rot?
GRAVEDIGGER Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
year.
HAMLET Why he more than another?
GRAVEDIGGER Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
body. Here’s a skull now hath lien you i’ th’ earth
three-and-twenty years.
HAMLET Whose was it?
GRAVEDIGGER A whoreson mad fellow’s it was.
Whose do you think it was?
HAMLET Nay, I know not.
GRAVEDIGGER A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick’s skull, the
King’s jester.
HAMLET This?
GRAVEDIGGER E’en that.
HAMLET, taking the skull Let me see. Alas, poor
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio—a fellow of infinite
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
lady’s chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
at that.—Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.
HORATIO What’s that, my lord?
HAMLET Dost thou think Alexander looked o’ this
fashion i’ th’ earth?
HORATIO E’en so.
HAMLET And smelt so? Pah!He puts the skull down.
HORATIO E’en so, my lord.
HAMLET To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
HORATIO ’Twere to consider too curiously to consider
so.
HAMLET No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Should patch a wall t’ expel the winter’s flaw!

Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.

But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
And with such maimèd rites? This doth betoken
The corse they follow did with desp’rate hand
Fordo its own life. ’Twas of some estate.
Couch we awhile and mark.They step aside.
LAERTES What ceremony else?
HAMLET That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.
LAERTES What ceremony else?
DOCTOR 
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
And, but that great command o’ersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
her.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of bell and burial.
LAERTES 
Must there no more be done?
DOCTOR No more be done.
We should profane the service of the dead
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
As to peace-parted souls.
LAERTES Lay her i’ th’ earth,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
A minist’ring angel shall my sister be
When thou liest howling.
HAMLET, to Horatio What, the fair Ophelia?
QUEEN Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
She scatters flowers.
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife;
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
And not have strewed thy grave.
LAERTES O, treble woe
Fall ten times treble on that cursèd head
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Deprived thee of!—Hold off the earth awhile,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
Leaps in the grave.
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
T’ o’ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
Of blue Olympus.
HAMLET, advancing 
What is he whose grief
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Conjures the wand’ring stars and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.
LAERTES, coming out of the grave 
The devil take thy soul!
HAMLET Thou pray’st not well.They grapple.
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.
KING Pluck them asunder.
QUEEN Hamlet! Hamlet!
ALL Gentlemen!
HORATIO Good my lord, be quiet.
Hamlet and Laertes are separated.
HAMLET 
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!
QUEEN O my son, what theme?
HAMLET 
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Could not with all their quantity of love
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
KING O, he is mad, Laertes!
QUEEN For love of God, forbear him.
HAMLET ’Swounds, show me what thou ’t do.
Woo’t weep, woo’t fight, woo’t fast, woo’t tear
thyself,
Woo’t drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
I’ll do ’t. Dost thou come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou ’lt mouth,
I’ll rant as well as thou.
QUEEN This is mere madness;
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
Anon, as patient as the female dove
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
His silence will sit drooping.
HAMLET Hear you, sir,
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
Hamlet exits.
KING 
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
Horatio exits.
To Laertes. Strengthen your patience in our last
night’s speech.
We’ll put the matter to the present push.—
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.—
This grave shall have a living monument.
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
They exit.



Scene 2
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.

HAMLET 
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
You do remember all the circumstance?
HORATIO Remember it, my lord!
HAMLET 
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly—
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
us
There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will—
HORATIO That is most
certain.
HAMLET Up from my cabin,
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold
(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
A royal knavery—an exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too,
With—ho!—such bugs and goblins in my life,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
My head should be struck off.
HORATIO Is ’t possible?
HAMLET 
Here’s the commission. Read it at more leisure.
Handing him a paper.
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?
HORATIO I beseech you.
HAMLET 
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair—
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman’s service. Wilt thou know
Th’ effect of what I wrote?
HORATIO Ay, good my lord.
HAMLET 
An earnest conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful tributary,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
And stand a comma ’tween their amities,
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving time allowed.
HORATIO How was this sealed?
HAMLET 
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
I had my father’s signet in my purse,
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Folded the writ up in the form of th’ other,
Subscribed it, gave ’t th’ impression, placed it
safely,
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
Thou knowest already.
HORATIO 
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to ’t.
HAMLET 
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
Does by their own insinuation grow.
’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Between the pass and fell incensèd points
Of mighty opposites.
HORATIO Why, what a king is this!
HAMLET 
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon—
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Popped in between th’ election and my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
And with such cozenage—is ’t not perfect
conscience
To quit him with this arm? And is ’t not to be
damned
To let this canker of our nature come
In further evil?
HORATIO 
It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there.
HAMLET 
It will be short. The interim’s mine,
And a man’s life’s no more than to say “one.”
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
For by the image of my cause I see
The portraiture of his. I’ll court his favors.
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a tow’ring passion.
HORATIO Peace, who comes here?

Enter Osric, a courtier.

OSRIC Your Lordship is right welcome back to
Denmark.
HAMLET I humbly thank you, sir. Aside to Horatio.
Dost know this waterfly?
HORATIO, aside to Hamlet No, my good lord.
HAMLET, aside to Horatio Thy state is the more gracious,
for ’tis a vice to know him. He hath much
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
crib shall stand at the king’s mess. ’Tis a chough,
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
OSRIC Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.
HAMLET I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: ’tis for the
head.
OSRIC I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.
HAMLET No, believe me, ’tis very cold; the wind is
northerly.
OSRIC It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
HAMLET But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
my complexion.
OSRIC Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
’twere—I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
on your head. Sir, this is the matter—
HAMLET I beseech you, remember. He motions to
Osric to put on his hat.
OSRIC Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes—believe
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
continent of what part a gentleman would see.
HAMLET Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
would dozy th’ arithmetic of memory, and yet but
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
nothing more.
OSRIC Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
HAMLET The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
gentleman in our more rawer breath?
OSRIC Sir?
HORATIO Is ’t not possible to understand in another
tongue? You will to ’t, sir, really.
HAMLET, to Osric What imports the nomination of
this gentleman?
OSRIC Of Laertes?
HORATIO His purse is empty already; all ’s golden words
are spent.
HAMLET Of him, sir.
OSRIC I know you are not ignorant—
HAMLET I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
would not much approve me. Well, sir?
OSRIC You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
is—
HAMLET I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
were to know himself.
OSRIC I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
laid on him by them, in his meed he’s
unfellowed.
HAMLET What’s his weapon?
OSRIC Rapier and dagger.
HAMLET That’s two of his weapons. But, well—
OSRIC The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
of very liberal conceit.
HAMLET What call you the “carriages”?
HORATIO I knew you must be edified by the margent
ere you had done.
OSRIC The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
HAMLET The phrase would be more germane to the
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
would it might be “hangers” till then. But on. Six
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages—
that’s the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
all “impawned,” as you call it?
OSRIC The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
HAMLET How if I answer no?
OSRIC I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
in trial.
HAMLET Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
hits.
OSRIC Shall I deliver you e’en so?
HAMLET To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
nature will.
OSRIC I commend my duty to your Lordship.
HAMLET Yours. Osric exits. He does well to commend
it himself. There are no tongues else for ’s
turn.
HORATIO This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
head.
HAMLET He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
them through and through the most fanned
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
their trial, the bubbles are out.

Enter a Lord.

LORD My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
take longer time.
HAMLET I am constant to my purposes. They follow
the King’s pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
now.
LORD The King and Queen and all are coming down.
HAMLET In happy time.
LORD The Queen desires you to use some gentle
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.
HAMLET She well instructs me.Lord exits.
HORATIO You will lose, my lord.
HAMLET I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all’s here
about my heart. But it is no matter.
HORATIO Nay, good my lord—
HAMLET It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.
HORATIO If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.
HAMLET Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
knows, what is ’t to leave betimes? Let be.

A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.

KING 
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
He puts Laertes’ hand into Hamlet’s.
HAMLET, to Laertes 
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
But pardon ’t as you are a gentleman. This presence
knows,
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
With a sore distraction. What I have done
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Was ’t Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away,
And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
Who does it, then? His madness. If ’t be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy.
Sir, in this audience
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
That I have shot my arrow o’er the house
And hurt my brother.
LAERTES I am satisfied in nature,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
Till by some elder masters of known honor
I have a voice and precedent of peace
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
I do receive your offered love like love
And will not wrong it.
HAMLET I embrace it freely
And will this brothers’ wager frankly play.—
Give us the foils. Come on.
LAERTES Come, one for me.
HAMLET 
I’ll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
Your skill shall, like a star i’ th’ darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.
LAERTES You mock me, sir.
HAMLET No, by this hand.
KING 
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
You know the wager?
HAMLET Very well, my lord.
Your Grace has laid the odds o’ th’ weaker side.
KING 
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.
LAERTES 
This is too heavy. Let me see another.
HAMLET 
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
OSRIC Ay, my good lord.
Prepare to play.
KING 
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.—
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
The King shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath,
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
Richer than that which four successive kings
In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups,
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
“Now the King drinks to Hamlet.” Come, begin.
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
Trumpets the while.
HAMLET Come on, sir.
LAERTES Come, my lord.They play.
HAMLET One.
LAERTES No.
HAMLET Judgment!
OSRIC A hit, a very palpable hit.
LAERTES Well, again.
KING 
Stay, give me drink.—Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
Here’s to thy health.
He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.
Drum, trumpets, and shot.
Give him the cup.
HAMLET 
I’ll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
Come. They play. Another hit. What say you?
LAERTES 
A touch, a touch. I do confess ’t.
KING 
Our son shall win.
QUEEN He’s fat and scant of breath.—
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
She lifts the cup.
HAMLET Good madam.
KING Gertrude, do not drink.
QUEEN 
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.She drinks.
KING, aside 
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.
HAMLET 
I dare not drink yet, madam—by and by.
QUEEN Come, let me wipe thy face.
LAERTES, to Claudius 
My lord, I’ll hit him now.
KING I do not think ’t.
LAERTES, aside 
And yet it is almost against my conscience.
HAMLET 
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.
LAERTES Say you so? Come on.Play.
OSRIC Nothing neither way.
LAERTES Have at you now!
Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.
KING Part them. They are incensed.
HAMLET Nay, come again.
The Queen falls.
OSRIC Look to the Queen there, ho!
HORATIO 
They bleed on both sides.—How is it, my lord?
OSRIC How is ’t, Laertes?
LAERTES 
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
He falls.
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.
HAMLET 
How does the Queen?
KING She swoons to see them bleed.
QUEEN 
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.She dies.
HAMLET 
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.Osric exits.
Treachery! Seek it out.
LAERTES 
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
No med’cine in the world can do thee good.
In thee there is not half an hour’s life.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Never to rise again. Thy mother’s poisoned.
I can no more. The King, the King’s to blame.
HAMLET 
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
work.Hurts the King.
ALL Treason, treason!
KING 
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
HAMLET 
Here, thou incestuous, murd’rous, damnèd Dane,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
Forcing him to drink the poison.
Follow my mother.King dies.
LAERTES He is justly served.
It is a poison tempered by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee,
Nor thine on me.Dies.
HAMLET 
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.—
I am dead, Horatio.—Wretched queen, adieu.—
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you—
But let it be.—Horatio, I am dead.
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied.
HORATIO Never believe it.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here’s yet some liquor left.He picks up the cup.
HAMLET As thou ’rt a man,
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I’ll ha ’t.
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
me!
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
To tell my story.
A march afar off and shot within.
What warlike noise is this?

Enter Osric.

OSRIC 
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
To th’ ambassadors of England gives
This warlike volley.
HAMLET O, I die, Horatio!
The potent poison quite o’ercrows my spirit.
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
But I do prophesy th’ election lights
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th’ occurrents, more and less,
Which have solicited—the rest is silence.
O, O, O, O!Dies.
HORATIO 
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
March within.
Why does the drum come hither?

Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.

FORTINBRAS Where is this sight?
HORATIO What is it you would see?
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
FORTINBRAS 
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
That thou so many princes at a shot
So bloodily hast struck?
AMBASSADOR The sight is dismal,
And our affairs from England come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
Where should we have our thanks?
HORATIO Not from his
mouth,
Had it th’ ability of life to thank you.
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to th’ yet unknowing world
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
Fall’n on th’ inventors’ heads. All this can I
Truly deliver.
FORTINBRAS Let us haste to hear it
And call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
HORATIO 
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
more.
But let this same be presently performed
Even while men’s minds are wild, lest more
mischance
On plots and errors happen.
FORTINBRAS Let four captains
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
The soldier’s music and the rite of war
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
ordnance are shot off.
